SOURCE: https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2023-12-01/html/2023-26493.htm RETRIEVED: 2026-09-24
88 FR 83959 (Dec. 1, 2023), BLM Notice of Intent To Amend Resource Management Plans for Section 368 Energy Corridor Revisions. Extract; wrapped lines joined.
Notice of Intent To Amend Resource Management Plans for Section 368 Energy Corridor Revisions and Prepare an Associated Environmental Impact Statement
Alturas Resource Management Plan, California Bishop Resource Management Plan, California Bradshaw-Harquahala Resource Management Plan, Arizona California Desert Conservation Area Plan, California Carson City Field Office Consolidated Resource Management Plan, Nevada Cedar Beaver Garfield Antimony Resource Management Plan, Utah Ely District Resource Management Plan, Nevada Lake Havasu Resource Management Plan, Arizona Las Vegas Resource Management Plan, Nevada Little Snake Resource Management Plan, Colorado Lower Sonoran Resource Management Plan, Arizona Mimbres Resource Management Plan, New Mexico Pinyon Management Framework Plan, Utah Rawlins Resource Management Plan, Wyoming Safford District Resource Management Plan, Arizona St. George Field Office Resource Management Plan, Utah Surprise Resource Management Plan, California Winnemucca District Resource Management Plan, Nevada Yuma Resource Management Plan, Arizona
The planning area is located in seven western states (Arizona, California, Colorado, Nevada, New Mexico, Utah, and Wyoming) and encompasses approximately 673 corridor miles on public land. This planning effort prioritizes consideration of amendments to only the corridors identified and described in this notice, which require interstate coordination and national-level planning to be implemented efficiently and effectively. This land use planning process will not evaluate or designate areas of critical environmental concern (ACECs), and the BLM will not consider ACEC nominations as part of this process.
Background Information
Section 368 of the Energy Policy Act of 2005 (EPAct) (42 U.S.C. 15926) directed the Secretaries of Agriculture, Commerce, Defense, Energy, and the Interior to designate corridors for oil, gas, and hydrogen pipelines and electricity transmission and distribution facilities on Federal land in the 11 contiguous Western states (Section 368 energy corridors). In January 2009, the BLM signed a record of decision (2009 WWEC Programmatic EIS ROD) approving amendments to 92 BLM resource management plans to designate approximately 5,000 miles of Section 368 energy corridors on BLM-administered lands in Arizona, California, Colorado, Idaho, Montana, Nevada, New Mexico, Oregon, Utah, Washington, and Wyoming, consistent with the requirements of the EPAct. Several organizations challenged the BLM's decision in Federal court. As part of a settlement agreement to resolve the challenge, the BLM, together with the U.S. Forest Service and the U.S. Department of Energy (collectively Agencies), agreed to conduct reviews of the designated corridors, gather input from stakeholders, and identify recommendations for potential revisions, deletions, and additions to these corridors and to interagency operating procedures. In April 2022, the Agencies issued a final report outlining the recommendations from the regional reviews for potential adjustments to the designated Section 368 energy corridors. The Energy Policy Act of 2005 Section 368 Energy Corridor Review Final Report: Regions 1-6 (``Final Report'') supported modifications to certain corridors on the basis that: portions of the corridors do not meet demand from new energy sources, including wind and solar; the presence of sensitive resources have inhibited Section 368 energy corridors from being used as intended; and physical pinch points present limitations on potential future development. Through this RMP amendment/EIS planning process, the BLM will evaluate modifications to seven designated Section 368 energy corridors through proposed amendments to 19 BLM RMPs in seven states (Arizona, California, Colorado, Nevada, New Mexico, Utah, and Wyoming). The proposed amendments could modify existing allocations, designations, objectives, and management direction.
The BLM will develop and analyze alternatives that include a range of potential changes to the seven designated Section 368 energy corridors identified in this notice and one potential corridor addition as summarized below. No Action Alternative: Under the No Action Alternative, the seven Section 368 energy corridors would remain as designated in the 2009 WWEC Programmatic EIS ROD (or as modified by a subsequent RMP amendment). The proposed Wamsutter-Powder Rim corridor addition would not be designated as a Section 368 energy corridor. Action Alternative A--Adopt the Recommendations in the Section 368 Energy Corridor Review Final Report: Under Action Alternative A, the BLM would adopt the changes recommended in the Final Report for each of the corridors listed below. [cir] Corridor 16-104--Remove entire corridor designation. [cir] Corridor 18-23--Shift entire corridor along existing 1000- kilovolt (kV) transmission line and narrow corridor width to 250-ft. [cir] Corridor 27-41--Shift corridor east at Milepost (MP) 130 along existing 500-kV transmission line and extend corridor east to Laughlin, Nevada. [cir] Corridor 30-52--Between MP 94 and MP 200, add a corridor braid along the Ten West Link 500 kV Project authorized right-of-way (ROW). Realign the corridor between MP 190 and MP 200 with the existing transmission line as the northern boundary of the corridor to avoid the Big Horn Mountain Wilderness Area and widen the corridor at MP 169 to maintain corridor width where a land conveyance to La Paz County was identified. [cir] Corridor 81-213--Add a corridor braid to the north along the Southline Transmission Line Project authorized ROW and the SunZia Southwest Transmission Project authorized ROW. Revise the corridor along existing 500-kV transmission line from MP 0 to MP 18 to avoid overlap with the Afton SEZ. [cir] Corridor 113-114--Add a corridor braid from MP 0 to MP 104 along the TransWest Express Transmission Line authorized ROW as well as an east-west connector at MP 30, connecting the designated corridor to the TransWest Express Transmission Project authorized ROW in eastern Nevada. [cir] Corridor 138-143--Remove entire corridor designation. [cir] Wamsutter-Powder Rim--Replace Corridor 138-143 with a new corridor along the TransWest Express Transmission Project authorized ROW. The northern end of the corridor would begin at the intersection with Corridor 73-138 (MP 15) in Wyoming and the southern end would terminate at the intersection with Corridor 126-133 (MP 45) in Colorado. Additional Action Alternatives--Additional action alternatives for individual corridors may be identified by cooperators, Federal agencies, Tribes, State and local agencies, and the public during the scoping process or by the BLM during its NEPA review. Any action alternatives would need to be responsive to the purpose and need. The BLM welcomes comments on all preliminary alternatives as well as suggestions for additional alternatives.
The BLM has identified the following potential effects to be examined during the planning process: effects to natural and cultural resources, other resource uses, and social and economic conditions from changes to Section 368 energy corridor designation for the corridors evaluated in this planning effort. This planning effort will evaluate changes to energy corridor designations by taking into account management considerations for such corridor designations; the recommendations provided in the Final Report; siting principles, including those identified in the settlement agreement; and the management direction within the land use plans to be amended under the RMP amendments/EIS. The designation of a corridor does not authorize any ground-disturbing activities; however, the analysis in the EIS will consider the environmental effects from future energy infrastructure development within the energy corridors under each alternative.

ALSO RETRIEVED 2026-09-24: https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2024-11-15/html/2024-26598.htm (Purple Sage Energy Center Draft RMPA/EIS NOA, FR Doc. 2024-26598)
EIS and provides information announcing the opening of the comment period on the Draft RMP Amendment/EIS. The Draft RMP Amendment is being considered to allow the BLM to evaluate the effects of modifying two existing, undeveloped utility corridors that intersect the Project site. This change would require amending the existing 1998 Las Vegas RMP. The planning area in Clark and Nye counties, Nevada, encompasses approximately 9,890,365 acres within the Southern Nevada District area. A BLM designated energy corridor, Segment #224-225, North Pahrump/ U.S. 95 to Las Vegas/Ivanpah Valley (a Section 368 energy corridor), along the Clark County/Nye County border intersects a portion of the Project site. A locally designated utility corridor, established in the 1998 Las Vegas RMP (the RMP-designed utility corridor), intersects a portion of the Project site. An amendment to the 1998 Las Vegas RMP is being considered to modify these two existing undeveloped corridors to avoid the Project site. The BLM is utilizing the NEPA substitution process to comply with the requirements of Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act, 54 U.S.C. 306108, consistent with 36 CFR 800.8(c). The BLM, as lead Federal agency, has incorporated information and the steps of the Section 106 process into the Draft EIS, and publication of the Draft EIS will allow the consulting parties and the public an opportunity to review and comment on the process as provided in 36 CFR 800.8(c)(2).

ALSO RETRIEVED 2026-09-24: https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2024-09-13/html/2024-20864.htm (Greenlink West ROD NOA, FR Doc. 2024-20864)
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: The Acting Deputy Secretary of the Interior has approved the RMP Amendments to re-classify the visual resources management classification of certain segments, and to make modifications to certain Section 368 corridors, which required amending the existing 2001 Carson City Consolidated RMP, 1997 Tonopah RMP and ROD, the 1998 ROD for the Approved Las Vegas RMP and Final EIS, and 2009 Approved RMP Amendment(s)/ROD for Designation of Energy Corridors on BLM-Administered Lands in the 11 Western States. The ROD allows the BLM and three other federal agencies (National Park Service, Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA), and Department of Energy/ National Nuclear Security Administration) to issue their agency- specific authorizations for their segments within their jurisdiction for the construction, operation and maintenance, and decommissioning of the 472-mile long transmission project and ancillary facilities. As reflected in the ROD, the BIA is only authorized to grant the rights- of-way (ROW) across those Tribal
