SOURCE: https://www.doi.gov/sites/default/files/document_handbooks/doi-handbook-of-nepa-procedures-concluded-508-compliant.pdf RETRIEVED: 2026-09-24
[DOI Handbook of NEPA Implementing Procedures (516 DM 1), February 2026, cover and citation note]

[[page 1]]
 
 
 
 
 
516 DM 1 – U.S. Department of the Interior 
Handbook of National Environmental Policy Act 
Implementing Procedures 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
February 2026 
  

[[page 2]]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Citations to this Handbook should be styled in the following format, using these specific 
citations as examples: DOI NEPA Handbook § 2.3(a)(3) or DOI NEPA Handbook Appendix § 2.

[Section 0.1 and footnote 1, handbook p. 1]
Section 0.1 Purpose and policy. 
The purpose of these procedures is to integrate compliance with the National Environmental 
Policy Act (NEPA) into bureau decision-making processes. Specifically, the procedures: 
describe how bureaus determine what actions are subject to NEPA’s procedural requirements 
and the appropriate level of NEPA review where applicable; ensure that relevant environmental 
information, including, as appropriate, economic information, is identified and considered early 
in the process to ensure informed decision-making; enable bureaus to conduct coordinated, 
consistent, predictable and timely environmental reviews; reduce unnecessary burdens and 
delays; and implement NEPA’s mandates regarding lead, joint-lead, participating Federal and 
cooperating agency roles and responsibilities, page and time limits, and preparation of 
environmental impact statements or environmental assessments by applicants or applicant-
directed contractors under Federal agency supervision.1 
(a) Procedural and Interpretive Guidance. This document, along with 43 CFR Part 46, sets 
forth the Department of the Interior (DOI or Department) procedures for implementing NEPA. 
It further explains the Department’s interpretation of certain key terms in NEPA. It does not, 
nor does it intend to, govern the individual rights and obligations of either regulated entities or 
persons. Additionally, this Handbook focuses only on the procedures governing bureau 
compliance with NEPA; in addition to the procedures set forth in this Handbook, bureaus must 
continue to comply with the requirements of other applicable laws and regulations and should 
comply with applicable policies. 
(b) Consultation with the Council on Environmental Quality. In addition to the process for 
establishing or revising categorical exclusions set forth in section 1.4(b) and (d), the 
Department will consult with the Council while developing or revising its NEPA 
implementing procedures, in accord with NEPA section 102(2)(B), 42 U.S.C. section 4332(B).  
Section 0.2 Applicability. 
(a) Applicability. This Handbook is applicable to all DOI bureaus, as bureau is defined in 6.1.  
(b) Authority. NEPA imposes certain procedural requirements on the exercise of the 
Department’s legal authority in relevant circumstances. Nothing contained in these procedures 
is intended or should be construed to abrogate or limit the Department’s other authorities or 
legal responsibilities.  
 
 
1 This Handbook is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, 
enforceable at law or equity by a party against the United States, its departments, agencies, instrumentalities or 
entities, its officers or employees, or any other person. Although the Handbook may in places restate statutory or 
regulatory requirements, the procedures in this Handbook themselves do not have the force or effect of law.

[Section 1.1(a)(6), handbook pp. 2-3]
(6) The proposed action is not a “major Federal action.”  
(i) The terms “major” and “Federal action,” each have independent force. NEPA 
applies only when both criteria are met. Such a determination is bound up in the 
facts and circumstances of each individual situation and is thus reserved to the 
judgment of the bureau in each instance.  
(ii) NEPA does not apply to non-Federal actions. Therefore, for example, under the 
terms of the statute, NEPA does not apply to actions with no or minimal Federal 
funding, or with no or minimal Federal involvement where a Federal agency cannot 
control the outcome of the project. NEPA section 111(10)(B)(i), 42 U.S.C. section 
4336e(10)(B)(i). Control over only a small part of an action is generally not 
sufficient to make an action “Federal” such that a NEPA obligation attaches.  
(iii) In addition to the illustrative general categories set forth in NEPA section 111(10), 
42 U.S.C. section 4336 e (10), bureaus have determined that the following non-

[Section 1.4, handbook pp. 6-7]
Section 1.4 Categorical exclusions. 
(a) Generally. This section describes the process that bureaus use for establishing and revising 
categorical exclusions, for adopting other agencies’ categorical exclusions, and for applying 
categorical exclusions to a proposed action. Categorical exclusions available to bureaus-
including CEs established and substantiated consistent with Department NEPA procedures, 
legislatively established or directed CEs, and CEs adopted from other agencies-are listed in 
43 CFR 46.210 or in bureau-specific lists provided in Appendix 2.  
(b) Establishing and revising categorical exclusions. See 43 CFR 46.205(h).  
[[page 11]]
7 
(c) Adopting categorical exclusions from other Federal agencies. Consistent with NEPA 
section 109, 42 U.S.C. § 4336c, a bureau may adopt a categorical exclusion listed in another 
agency’s NEPA procedures. When adopting a categorical exclusion, the bureau will: 
(1) Consult with the agency that established the categorical exclusion to ensure that the 
proposed adoption of the categorical exclusion is appropriate; and 
(2) Publish notice in the Federal Register that the bureau is adopting the categorical 
exclusion, including a brief description of the proposed action or category of proposed 
actions to which the bureau intends to apply the adopted categorical exclusion.  
(d) Removal of categorical exclusions. See 43 CFR 46.205(i).  
(e) Applying categorical exclusions. See 43 CFR 46.205. If a bureau modifies a proposed 
action by incorporating design elements that reduce or eliminate adverse impacts to resource 
values, the modified proposal is considered a new proposal for categorical exclusion 
consideration under DOI NEPA procedures. Considering the modified proposal a “new 
proposal” for purposes of categorical exclusion consideration does not require starting over 
with other aspects of the NEPA review. A bureau must evaluate the proposed action for the 
presence of any of the extraordinary circumstances listed at 43 CFR 46.215 before that bureau 
relies on a categorical exclusion. 
(f) Documentation of categorical exclusion determinations. When the Responsible Official 
relies on a categorical exclusion to fulfill bureau obligations under NEPA, the Responsible 
Official will document its evaluation of the applicability of a categorical exclusion if required 
by law, regulation, or as specified in DOI or bureau policy.  
(g) Reliance on categorical exclusion determinations of other agencies. See 43 CFR 46.205(e) 
and Appendix 1 § 3. 
(h) Applying multiple categorical exclusions. See 43 CFR 46.205(f) and Appendix 1 § 2.  
(i) List of categorical exclusions. See 43 CFR 46.210 and Appendix 2. 
(j) Appendix 2 of this Handbook lists categorical exclusions that are available for use by each 
bureau.  
(k) Use of other bureau categorical exclusions. See 43 CFR 46.205(g) and Appendix 1 § 2.

[Section 6.1(g) Connected action, handbook p. 24]
(g) Connected action means a separate Federal action within the authority of a Federal agency 
that is closely related to the proposed action and should be addressed in a single environmental 
document because the proposed agency action:  
(1) Automatically triggers the separate Federal action, which independently would require 
the preparation of additional environmental documents; 
(2) Cannot proceed unless the separate Federal action is taken previously or simultaneously; 
or 
(3) Is an interdependent part of a larger Federal action that includes a separate Federal 
action, which mutually depend on the larger Federal action for their justification. 
(h) Cooperating Agency means any Federal, State, Tribal, or local agency that has been

[Appendix 1, CE and Extraordinary Circumstances Review Protocol, handbook p. 32]
component elements are covered by multiple CEs available to the bureau, unless exempt from 
such review by statute, the bureau must review the proposed action for the presence of 
extraordinary circumstances that would, if present, preclude use of the CE or CEs. DOI’s 
extraordinary circumstances are listed in 43 CFR 46.215 and must be considered when using on 
administratively established or adopted categorical exclusions; any exceptions to the 
extraordinary circumstances review requirement is noted in the terms of the categorical exclusion 
itself. If the proposed action, considered together with any connected actions, would implicate 
any of the extraordinary circumstances, and the bureau cannot eliminate those extraordinary 
circumstances by modifying the proposed action to reduce or remove potentially significant 
impacts, then the bureau would need to develop an environmental assessment or environmental 
impact statement. 
 
If the proposed action or its component elements meet the terms of the CE (or CEs) and no 
extraordinary circumstances are present for the proposed action, then the Responsible Official 
can approve the proposed action using the CE(s). There are limited exceptions to the requirement

SOURCE: https://www.doi.gov/document-library/handbook/516-dm-1-handbook-national-environmental-policy-act-implementing RETRIEVED: 2026-09-24
[DOI Document Library landing page text]
516 DM 1 - Handbook of National Environmental Policy Act Implementing Procedures
Office of the Secretary
516 DM 1
February 23, 2026
