SOURCE: https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2012-02-24/html/2012-4198.htm RETRIEVED: 2026-09-24
77 FR 11152 (Feb. 24, 2012), FR Doc. 2012-4198, Notice of Intent To Prepare a Revision to the Carson City District Resource Management Plan and Associated EIS, Nevada. Extract; wrapped lines joined.
Notice of Intent To Prepare a Revision to the Carson City District Resource Management Plan and Associated Environmental Impact Statement, Nevada
SUMMARY: In compliance with the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969, as amended, and the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976, as amended, the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) Carson City District (CCD), Carson City, Nevada, intends to prepare a Resource Management Plan (RMP) revision with an associated Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for the Carson City District, and by this notice is announcing the beginning of the scoping process to solicit public comments and identify issues. The BLM will also seek nominations for Areas of Critical Environmental Concern (ACEC) and information on lands that may possess wilderness characteristics. The RMP will replace the existing Carson City Field Office Consolidated RMP (2001).
announces the beginning of the scoping process, and seeks public input on issues and planning criteria. The planning area is located in portions of 12 counties within 2 States (Washoe, Storey, Carson City, Douglas, Lyon, Churchill, Mineral, and Nye counties within Nevada; and Sierra, Alpine, Plumas, and Lassen counties within California), and encompasses approximately 5 million acres of public land. The planning area includes all lands regardless of jurisdiction; however the BLM will only make decisions on lands or interest in land under the BLM's jurisdiction, including subsurface minerals. The decision area includes only public land or interest in land managed by the BLM. The purpose of the public scoping process is to determine relevant issues that may influence the scope of the environmental analysis, including alternatives, and guide the planning process. Preliminary issues for the planning area have been identified by BLM personnel, Federal, State, and local agencies, and other stakeholders. The issues include, but are not limited to: Managing vegetative and water resources, including noxious and invasive species management; identifying terrestrial and aquatic wildlife and fish priority habitats; identifying and evaluating Areas of Critical Environmental Concern; identifying lands with wilderness characteristics; determining eligibility for Wild and Scenic Rivers, National Scenic and Historic Trail management, identifying off-highway vehicle designations and travel management, and special recreation management areas to meet increasing recreation demands; managing and protecting cultural, historical, and paleontological resources, as well as Native American religious and traditional values; visual resource management; managing renewable energy development for geothermal, solar and wind; identifying land tenure adjustments to meet community growth needs and sustainable development, and to facilitate the management of public lands; managing minerals, including stipulations to protect sensitive resources. Additional management concerns identified by the BLM include: Urban mining; grazing allotments near urban areas; and access to public lands. Preliminary planning criteria include: (1) The RMP revision will comply with FLPMA and all other applicable laws, regulations, and policies; (2) The RMP revision will analyze impacts from all alternatives in accordance with regulations at 43 CFR part 1610 and 40 CFR part 1500; (3) Decisions in the RMP revision will only apply to public lands and the mineral estate managed by the BLM; (4) The RMP revision process will follow the BLM Land Use Planning Handbook H-1601-1; (5) The RMP revision planning process will include broad- based public participation; (6) The RMP revision process will consider the identification and management of lands with wilderness characteristics; and (7) The RMP revision decisions will consider and incorporate existing plans and policies to the maximum extent possible of adjacent local, State, Federal, and tribal agencies to the extent consistent with Federal law and regulations applicable to public lands; (8) The RMP revision process will rely on available inventories of the lands and resources as well as data gathered during the planning process; (9) The RMP revision process will follow requirements to address sage-grouse habitat and conservation as outlined in the National Sage-Grouse Habitat Conservation Strategy, the Greater Sage- Grouse Notice of Intent (FR 2011-36152, December 9, 2011), and the most current BLM guidance and instruction memoranda; (10) The RMP revisions process will use Geographic Information Systems and corporate geospatial data to the extent practicable and Federal Geographic Data Committee standards and other applicable BLM data standards will be followed; (11) The RMP revision EIS will be developed through the BLM's ePlanning system to the extent consistent with the current functionality of the system and schedule considerations; (12) The RMP revision will incorporate and observe the principles of multiple use and sustained yield; (13) The RMP planning process will involve consultation with Native American tribal governments; (14) The RMP revision will recognize valid existing rights and incorporate valid existing management from the existing Carson City Field Office Consolidated RMP (2001) as appropriate; (15) The RMP revision will include a review of eligibility findings and tentative classification of waterways as eligible for inclusion in the National Wild and Scenic River System and follow the criteria contained in 43 CFR part 8351. The BLM will collaborate with tribes, State and local governments, Federal agencies, local stakeholders, and others with interest in the RMP revision process. You may submit comments on issues and planning criteria to the BLM using one of the methods listed in the ADDRESSES section above. Before including an address, phone number, email address, or other personal identifying information in your comment, you should be aware that the entire comment--including personal identifying information--may be made publicly available at any time. While you can ask us in your comment to withhold your personal identifying information from public review, we cannot guarantee that we will be able to do so. The minutes and list of attendees for each scoping meeting will be available to the public and open for 30 days after the meeting to any participant who wishes to clarify the views he or she expressed. The BLM will evaluate the identified issues to be addressed in the RMP and will place them into one of three categories: 1. Issues to be resolved by the RMP; 2. Issues to be resolved through policy or administrative action; or 3. Issues beyond the scope of this RMP. The BLM will provide an explanation in the Draft RMP/Draft EIS as to why an issue is placed in category two or three. The public is also encouraged to help identify management questions and concerns that should be addressed in the RMP. The BLM will work collaboratively with interested parties to identify the management decisions that are best suited to local, regional, and national needs and concerns. The BLM will use an interdisciplinary approach to develop the RMP in order to consider the variety of resource issues and concerns identified. Specialists with expertise in the following disciplines will be involved in the planning process: Wildlife and fisheries; threatened and endangered species; special status species; vegetation; invasive and noxious weeds; renewable energy; lands and realty; minerals management; outdoor recreation; off highway vehicle and transportation; air resources; visual resources; cultural resources and Native American concerns; paleontology; hydrology; public safety; law enforcement; fire ecology and management; forestry; rangeland management; sociology and economics; and Geographic Information Systems.

ALSO RETRIEVED 2026-09-24: https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2025-05-28/html/2025-09497.htm (Greenlink North Proposed RMPA/Final EIS NOA, FR Doc. 2025-09497)
Notice of Availability of the Proposed Resource Management Plan Amendments and Final Environmental Impact Statement for the Proposed Greenlink North Transmission Project in White Pine, Eureka, Lander, Churchill, and Lyon Counties, Nevada
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: This notice announces the start of a 30-day BLM protest period of the proposed RMP amendment and the start of a 45- day Forest Service, pre-decisional administrative review process, also known as an objection process, upon a legal notice being published in the Reno-Gazette Journal, the newspaper of record for the Humboldt- Toiyabe National Forest (36 CFR part 218, subparts A and B). This document provides notice that the BLM Nevada State Director has prepared a proposed RMP amendment/final EIS for the Greenlink North Transmission Line Project. The RMP amendment would amend the existing 2001 Consolidated Resource Management Plan in Carson City District, 1986 Shoshone-Eureka Resource Management Plan/Record of Decision in Battle Mountain District, and 2008 Record of Decision/Resource Management Plan in Ely District. The proposed RMP amendment is being considered to allow the BLM to evaluate the establishment of a 198- mile-long utility corridor that is up to 3,500-feet wide within greater sage-grouse habitat management areas and in proximity to lek buffers on BLM-administered lands. The originally proposed utility corridor width (3 miles) and length (235 miles) was reduced after scoping to be consistent with other national utility corridor widths, and to clarify the corridor would apply to BLM-administered lands only. The planning area is in White Pine, Eureka, Lander, Churchill, and Lyon counties, Nevada and encompasses approximately 83,400 acres of BLM-administered lands. A NOA for the draft EIS/proposed RMP amendment was published in the Federal Register on September 10, 2024 (89 FR 73429), providing the public with a 90-day comment period. The public comment period closed on December 11, 2024. The BLM received 28 public comment emails and letters containing a total of 355 substantive comments. The public comments focused on: biological resources; alternatives development; visual resources; cultural resources; impacts to general and special- status wildlife species and their habitats; social and economic conditions; vegetation/riparian/noxious and invasive weeds/special status plant species; water resources; recreation; socioeconomic concerns; and Native American cultural/sacred sites.
The BLM's purpose and need for this Federal action is to respond to the right-of-way (ROW) application submitted by NV Energy under Title V of FLPMA (43 U.S.C. 1761) on July 20, 2020 to construct, operate, maintain, and decommission a proposed system of new 525-kV, 345-kV, 230-kV, and 120-kV electric transmission facilities on BLM-administered lands in White Pine, Eureka, Lander, Churchill, and Lyon counties, in compliance with FLPMA, BLM ROW regulations, NEPA, the BLM NEPA Handbook (BLM 2008), Department of the Interior NEPA regulations, and other applicable Federal laws and policies. In accordance with FLPMA, the BLM is authorized to grant ROWs on public lands for systems of generation, transmission, and distribution of electrical energy (43 U.S.C. 1761(a)(4)). If approved, the ROW for the proposed project would implement support the direction in Executive Orders 14154, Unleashing American Energy, and 14156, Declaring a National Energy Emergency, and Secretary's Orders 3417, Addressing the National Energy Emergency, and 3418, Unleashing American Energy. The Greenlink North Transmission Project as proposed would not conform to the RMPs in the BLM Carson City, Battle Mountain, and Ely District Offices as required by 43 CFR 1610.5-3(a). The BLM would need to amend these RMPs to bring the Greenlink North Transmission Project into conformance. In particular, the Proponent's proposed transmission line does not conform to the management objectives of the planning area for transmission lines greater than 100-kV. The purpose of the RMP amendment is to ensure that development of the Greenlink North Transmission Project conforms to the RMPs' provisions, as provided for in 43 CFR 1610.5-3(c), by providing for the designation of a utility corridor and modifying restrictions in greater sage-grouse habitat management areas and in proximity to leks. The Forest Service, Humboldt-Toiyabe National Forest also received an application from NV Energy for an approximately 10-mile segment of the project. The Forest Service's purpose and need is to respond to NV Energy's application for a Special Use Permit to construct, operate, maintain, and decommission the proposed 500-kV transmission line on National Forest System land in Lander County in compliance with FLPMA, the National Forest Management Act (16 U.S.C. 1601-1614), and the Toiyabe National Forest Land and Resource Management Plan (Forest Service 1986, as amended), which provides standards and guidelines for managing the National Forest.
The BLM has analyzed three action alternatives in detail, plus the no action alternative. The State Director and Forest Supervisor have identified NV Energy's proposed action with three modified segments crossing BLM and National Forest System land as the preferred alternative. The first modified segment realigns the proposed action south of the public purpose conveyance parcels that will be transferred to Churchill County resulting from the National Defense Authorization Act of 2023. This alternative segment would be approximately 8 miles long and slightly reduce the disturbance footprint of the 525-kV transmission line on BLM-administered lands. The second modified segment would realign the proposed action further away from the recently established Desatoya Wilderness Area. The third modified segment is the Forest Service preferred northern alternative route from the Lander Substation that would cross approximately 10 miles of the Humboldt-Toiyabe National Forest and approximately 9 miles of adjacent BLM-administered lands to the east. The route would parallel an existing 230-kV transmission line within the forest's existing utility corridor until reconnecting with the proposed action

ALSO RETRIEVED 2026-09-24: https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2024-01-19/html/2024-00942.htm (Dodge Flat II Solar NOI to amend Carson City FO Consolidated RMP, FR Doc. 2024-00942)
Notice of Intent To Amend the Carson City Field Office Consolidated Resource Management Plan and Prepare an Associated Environmental Assessment for the Dodge Flat II Solar Energy Center in Washoe County, NV
The BLM's purpose for this Federal action is to respond to the right-of-way application submitted under Title V of the FLPMA (43 U.S.C. 1761), and to amend the slope management direction in the 2001 Carson City Field Office
