SOURCE: https://www.clarkcountynv.gov/adobe/assets/urn:aaid:aem:9c40edac-e62d-432f-b1b1-146c972eeb75/original/as/chap2.pdf RETRIEVED: 2026-09-24
Clark County MSHCP/EIS, Final, Chapter 2, dated 9/00. Text extracted from PDF; line breaks follow the PDF layout. Extract: pages 2-1 to 2-4.
Clark County MSHCP/EIS 2.  Multiple Species Habitat Conservation Plan
Final 2-1 9/00
Chapter 2
Multiple Species Habitat Conservation
Plan
2.1 Executive Summary of the Multiple
Species Habitat Conservation Plan
2.1.1 Introduction
Clark County; the Cities of Las Vegas, North Las Vegas, Boulder City, Mesquite, and
Henderson; and the Nevada Department of Transportation (Applicants) have prepared a
Multiple Species Habitat Conservation Plan (MSHCP) and Environmental Impact
Statement (EIS) for Clark County, Nevada.  The MSHCP/EIS was prepared in
cooperation with the Clark County Implementation and Monitoring Committee (I & M
Committee), the United States Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS), the Nevada Division
of Wildlife (NDOW), the United States Bureau of Land Management (BLM), the United
States National Park Service (NPS), the United States Forest Service (USFS), the U.S.
Geological Survey Biological Resources Division (BRD), the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the University of Nevada, Las Vegas (UNLV),
the University of Nevada, Reno (UNR), the Biological Resources Research Center at
UNR (BRRC), the Nevada Natural Heritage Program (NNHP), the Nevada Division of
Forestry (NDF), the Southern Nevada Water Authority (SNWA), and Utah State
University (USU) (collectively, the Participants).
The MSHCP is intended under Section 10(a) of the Endangered Species Act to support
the issuance, by the USFWS, of a permit or permits (Section 10(a) Permit) which would:
• Allow the “take” of threatened or endangered species resulting from otherwise lawful
activities on non-Federal properties within the county; and
• Allow the “take” of threatened or endangered species that are currently unlisted but
may become listed in the future.
2.  Multiple Species Habitat Conservation Plan  Clark County MSHCP/EIS
Final 2-2 9/00
[...]
Existing and proposed land uses of primary concern with respect to the species addressed
by this MSHCP and their habitats include agriculture, flood control, livestock grazing,
mineral extraction, off-highway vehicle activities, parks and recreation, residential and
commercial development, solid waste facilities, transportation, utilities, and water and
sewage facilities.  These activities will be covered by the terms and conditions of the
MSHCP on non-Federal lands within Clark County.  While changes in these land uses
will be the result of the growth of the population in the Las Vegas Valley and rural
communities, with the exception of residential, industrial, and commercial land
development, these activities will occur on both non-Federal and Federal lands.
The MSHCP will provide coverage under Section 10(a) for Covered Species on non-
Federal lands.  Although the MSHCP will not provide for incidental take on Federal lands
2.  Multiple Species Habitat Conservation Plan  Clark County MSHCP/EIS
Final 2-4 9/00
or resulting from Federal actions on non-Federal lands, it does provide the framework for
avoidance and minimization of impacts to Covered Species on Federal lands or resulting
from Federal actions on non-Federal lands.
2.1.4 Scope of the MSHCP
Clark County and the Cities of Las Vegas, North Las Vegas, Henderson, Mesquite, and
Boulder City are seeking a Section 10(a) Permit for the incidental take of Covered
Species, as hereinafter defined, in connection with the development of non-Federal lands
within Clark County for a 30-year period.  In addition, NDOT has joined as an Applicant
for the permit to allow the incidental take of desert tortoises within desert tortoise habitat,
south of the 38 th parallel and below 5,000 feet in elevation, and the incidental take of
other Covered Species within Clark County in connection with:
• The construction and maintenance of roads, highways, and material sites outside of
Intensively Managed Areas (IMAs) and Less Intensively Managed Areas (LIMAs)
within Clark County and desert tortoise critical habitat outside of Clark County; and
• The maintenance of roads, highways, and material sites within IMAs and LIMAs
within Clark County and desert tortoise critical habitat outside of Clark County.
Because some Federal lands within Clark County will be transferred to non-Federal
owners during the permit period, a projected level of such transfers from Federal to non-
Federal ownership has been included in the potential estimated loss of habitat in the
permit area as well.  The permit is intended to apply to such lands as they are transferred
out of Federal ownership, with the exception of such lands that are within established
IMAs and LIMAs.  Thus, the permit will apply to all non-Federal lands that currently
exist and all non-Federal lands which result from sales or transfers from the Federal
government after the issuance of the Section 10(a) Permit if they are located outside of
established IMAs and LIMAs as hereinafter defined. In no event, however, shall the total
amount of take exceed 145,000 acres.
The total number of acres of Federal and non-Federal lands within the permit area that
potentially are available for future development is approximately 418,200.  This total
excludes existing development, the Boulder City Conservation Easement area, and state
lands managed for wildlife values.  The total also includes the 175,000 acres projected to

ALSO RETRIEVED 2026-09-24: https://www.clarkcountynv.gov/government/departments/environment_and_sustainability/desert_conservation_program/mshcp-permit-amendment-faq
Clark County Desert Conservation Multiple Species Habitat Conservation Plan--PERMIT AMENDMENT
Why are these Clark County MSHCP Permit Amendment meetings being held?
The Clark County Desert Conservation Program (DCP) oversees the Multiple Species Habitat Conservation Plan (MSHCP) and compliance with the Endangered Species Act. As part of that compliance, an "incidental take permit" was granted and that permit is getting close to expiring. DCP will be applying to amend that permit to allow for continued protection and conservation efforts and streamlined development. DCP is looking for input from the community on the future of desert conservation, wildlife protection, and residential and commercial development.
What is an incidental take permit?
An incidental take permit is required when non-federal activity (e.g., development) will negatively impact species listed as threatened or endangered (e.g., habitat loss). The current incidental take permit allows for development to occur on up to 145,000 acres of non-federal land within Clark County's jurisdiction while setting aside acreage for the protection of wildlife and conservation of natural habitat.
Why is an amendment to the incidental take permit needed?
The original permit is set to expire when all 145,000 acres has been developed, or in January of 2031, whichever comes first. There are only approximately 17,000 acres left to develop under the current permit, but there are approximately 215,000 acres of undeveloped, non-federal, land, or land that may become non-federal throughout Clark County.
What happens if the incidental take permit is allowed to expire without an amendment?
If an amendment is not granted, and the permit expires through development of the remaining 17,000 acres allowed, or the set expiration of January 2031, the economy will be negatively impacted, and development of important infrastructure and affordable housing initiatives will be dramatically impeded.
What changes is DCP asking for in this permit amendment?
Increased number of acres covered under the permit, addressing the gap between the approximately 17,000 acres left to develop on the current permit and the approximately 215,000 acres of undeveloped, non-federal, land, or land that may become non-federal, throughout Clark County.
Revise the list of species covered under the permit to ensure the focus is on the most vulnerable and most likely to be impacted by non-federal development activities.
Increase the next permit term to 50 years. The permit amendment is a lengthy and expensive process and planning for the next 50 years will provide the community with economic stability and assurances that responsible growth will continue, as necessary, while protecting species and their habitats.

ALSO RETRIEVED 2026-09-24: https://www.clarkcountynv.gov/adobe/assets/urn:aaid:aem:dd71bf34-e4d6-447b-bc7b-631819ffd935/original/as/dcp-andmshcp-101.pdf (Clark County Desert Conservation Program, 'Clark County desert conservation program and Multiple Species Habitat Conservation Plan 101' slide deck, undated). PDF text extraction; slide text is broken across lines as extracted.
Scope of the Permit & MSHCP
n
Covers all non
-
Federal (private, municipal, state) 
lands within Clark County and NDOT activities in 
areas within Clark, Nye, Lincoln and Esmeralda 
Counties south of the 38
th
 
parallel and below 5,000 
feet in elevation.
How Long & How Much Take?
n
30 year permit starting February 2001
n
[...]
Funding
n
Required expenditures for 
conservation actions = 
approximately $4 million 
per biennium
n
3 funding sources:
•
Section 10 mitigation fees
•
Section 7 mitigation fees
