SOURCE: https://www.doi.gov/sites/default/files/document_handbooks/doi-handbook-of-nepa-procedures-concluded-508-compliant.pdf RETRIEVED: 2026-09-24
[DOI NEPA Handbook (516 DM 1), February 2026, Appendix 2, BLM, 11.9 introduction, handbook p. 64]
 
 
Bureau of Land Management (BLM) 
 
11.9 Categorical Exclusions. The following BLM actions are designated categorical exclusions 
unless one or more of the Department’s extraordinary circumstances apply. As proposed actions are 
designed and then reviewed against the CE list, proposed actions or activities must be, at a 
minimum, consistent with DOI and BLM manuals, handbooks, policies, and applicable land use 
plans regarding design features, best management practices, terms and conditions, conditions of 
approval, and stipulations. 
 
CEs established by statute, adopted under Section 109 or marked by an asterisk require 
documentation. For most other actions that are categorically excluded using administrative CEs, 
BLM recommends that the Responsible Official document which CX applies. Documentation

[Appendix 2, BLM, 11.9 E. Realty, handbook pp. 70-71]
E. Realty. 
 
(1) Withdrawal extensions or modifications, which only establish a new time period 
and entail no changes in segregative effect or use. 
 
(2) Withdrawal revocations, terminations, extensions, or modifications; and 
classification terminations or modifications which do not result in lands being 
opened or closed to the general land laws or to the mining or mineral leasing laws. 
 
(3) Withdrawal revocations, terminations, extensions, or modifications; classification 
terminations or modifications; or opening actions where the land would be opened 
only to discretionary land laws and where subsequent discretionary actions (prior to 
implementation) are in conformance with and are covered by a Resource 
Management Plan/EIS (or plan amendment and EA or EIS). 
 
(4) Administrative conveyances from the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) to the 
State of Alaska to accommodate airports on lands appropriated by the FAA prior to 
the enactment of the Alaska Statehood Act. 
(5) Actions taken in conveying mineral interest where there are no known mineral 
values in the land under Section 209(b) of the Federal Land Policy and 
Management Act of 1976 (FLPMA). 
 
(6) Resolution of class one color-of-title cases. 
 
(7) Issuance of recordable disclaimers of interest under Section 315 of FLPMA. 
 
(8) Corrections of patents and other conveyance documents under Section 316 of 
FLPMA and other applicable statutes. 
 
(9) Renewals and assignments of leases, permits, or rights-of-way where no additional 
rights are conveyed beyond those granted by the original authorizations. 
 
(10) Transfer or conversion of leases, permits, or rights-of-way from one agency to 
another (e.g., conversion of Forest Service permits to a BLM Title V Right-of-way). 
 
(11) Conversion of existing right-of-way grants to Title V grants or existing leases to 
FLPMA Section 302(b) leases where no new facilities or other changes are needed. 
 
(12) Grants of right-of-way wholly within the boundaries of other compatibly developed 
rights-of-way.25 
 
(13) Amendments to existing rights-of-way, such as the upgrading of existing facilities, 
which entail no additional disturbances outside the right-of-way boundary. 
 
(14) Grants of rights-of-way for an overhead line (no pole or tower on BLM land) 
 
25 NPS adopted this CE prior to the 2025 DOI NEPA Procedures. See 90 FR 24644. 
[[page 75]]
   
 
71 
crossing over a corner of public land. 
 
(15) Transfers of land or interest in land to or from other bureaus or federal agencies 
where current management will continue and future changes in management will be 
subject to the NEPA process. 
 
(16) Acquisition of easements for an existing road or issuance of leases, permits, or 
rights-of-way for the use of existing facilities, improvements, or sites for the same 
or similar purposes. 
 
(17) Grant of a short rights-of-way for utility service or terminal access roads to an 
individual residence, outbuilding, or water well. 
 
(18) Temporary placement of a pipeline above ground. 
(19) Issuance of short-term (3 years or less) rights-of-way or land use authorizations for 
such uses as storage sites, apiary sites, and construction sites where the proposal 
includes rehabilitation to restore the land to its natural or original condition. 
 
(20) One-time issuance of short-term (3 years or less) rights-of-way or land use 
authorizations which authorize trespass action where no new use or construction is 
allowed, and where the proposal includes rehabilitation to restore the land to its 
natural or original condition.
