SOURCE: https://eplanning.blm.gov/Project-Home/?id=9691df34-a05e-f111-bec6-001dd8084607 RETRIEVED: 2026-09-24
[BLM National NEPA Register project page, Project Information section]
Project Information 
NEPA Number
DOI-BLM-NV-S010-2026-0068-DNA
Project Name
DesertLink - Sloan Canyon 500kV Loop-in
Project Type
DNA
NEPA Status
Completed - Completed
Lead Office
Las Vegas Field Office
Last Updated
08/13/2026 - 12:00 AM
Project Description
DesertLink, LLC has applied for a right-of-way (ROW) to construct, operate, and maintain the Sloan Canyon 500 kV Loop Project, which includes both permanent and temporary disturbances. The project involves the installation of 12 self-supporting steel pole structures, the construction of approximately 1 mile of new permanent access roads, and approximately one half (0.5) mile of temporary access roads. The Project is designed to interconnect the expanded Sloan Canyon Substation with the existing Harry Allen–Eldorado 500 kV transmission line. In total, the Project will cause 5.7 acres of permanent disturbance and 37.1 acres of temporary disturbance on public and private lands in Clark County, Nevada, within a Designated Utility Corridor. More details can be found in Table 1 below.
Project Location
City
State/Territory
Zip Code
County(ies)
Boulder City
Nevada
89005
Clark
Application Information
Applicant
DesertLink, LLC
Case File Number
NVNV105885659 (N-86359)
Program
Lands and Realty
Sub-Program
Rights-of-Way
Project Dates
Start Date
5/20/2026
Decision Date
5/22/2026

SOURCE: https://blm-eplanninganonconnector-lap.blm.gov/api/Blob_Storage_Download_External (blobUrl /ebfb4bec-8c54-f111-bec6-001dd804183b/Documents/DOI-BLM-NV-S010-2026-0068-DNA_updated_508.pdf) RETRIEVED: 2026-09-24
[Document retrieved through the NEPA Register document download connector; pypdf text extraction, first 30000 characters]

[[page 1]]
 
 
 
 
 
 
Determination of NEPA Adequacy  
DOI-BLM-NV-S010-2026-0068-DNA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DesertLink - Sloan Canyon 500kV Loop -in 
DesertLink LLC  
N-86359 
 
 
 
 
 
PREPARING OFFICE 
U.S. Department of the Interior 
Bureau of Land Management 
4701 N. Torrey Pines Drive 
Las Vegas, Nevada 89130 
702-515-5000  
  Las Vegas Field Office 
Determination of NEPA Adequacy  
 

[[page 2]]
DOI-BLM-NV-S010-2026-0068-DNA  2 
UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR 
Bureau of Land Management 
Las Vegas Field Office/Pahrump Field Office 
4701 N Torrey Pines Drive 
Las Vegas, NV 89130 
 
DETERMINATION OF NEPA ADEQUACY WORKSHEET 
DOI-BLM-NV-S010-2026-0068-DNA 
 
Proposed Action Title/Type: DesertLink - Sloan Canyon 500kV Loop-in 
Lease/Serial/Case File No (if any): NVNV105885659 (N-86359)  
Location of Proposed Action:  
Mount Diablo Meridian, Nevada 
T. 24 S., R. 62 E.,  
  sec. 24, SE1/4NE1/4SW1/4, and S1/2SW1/4; 
  sec. 25, NW1/4, and E1/2SW1/4; 
  sec. 26, SE1/4NE1/4; 
  sec. 36, NW1/4NE1/4NW1/4 
Applicant: DesertLink, LLC 
 
A.  DESCRIPTION OF THE PROPOSED ACTION 
DesertLink, LLC has applied for a right-of-way (ROW) to construct, operate, and maintain the 
Sloan Canyon 500 kV Loop Project, which includes both permanent and temporary disturbances. 
The project involves the installation of 12 self-supporting steel pole structures, the construction 
of approximately 1 mile of new permanent access roads, and approximately one half (0.5) mile 
of temporary access roads. The Project is designed to interconnect the expanded Sloan Canyon 
Substation with the existing Harry Allen–Eldorado 500 kV transmission line. In total, the Project 
will cause 5.7 acres of permanent disturbance and 37.1 acres of temporary disturbance on public 
and private lands in Clark County, Nevada, within a Designated Utility Corridor. More details 
can be found in Table 1 below.  
Additionally, prior to the commencement of construction, geotechnical borings will be 
completed on Boulder City owned property. A total of 2 borings will be completed on Boulder 
City owned lands. Borings will drilled up to 70 feet deep. More details can be found in Table 2 
and the access section below. 
 
[[page 3]]
DOI-BLM-NV-S010-2026-0068-DNA  3 
Table 1 – Detailed Disturbance Breakdown 
Project Component Facility Type Dimensions 
(feet) 
Number of 
Each 
Permanent 
Disturbance 
(acres) 
Temporary 
Disturbance 
(acres)  
Temporary Work 
Areas 
Guard Structure 55'x175' 2  0.4  
Laydown Yard 200'x400' 3  6.5  
Pullsite 200'x600' 8  16.6  
Structure Work 
Areas 200'x200' 9  
13.6 
 
Access Roads 
New Permanent 0.7 miles x 
24’ 0.7 miles 2  
 
Temporary* N/A 0.38 miles  
 
 
Permanent Structure 
Pads 
2PDC-DE-SS 100'x100' 2 0.5  
 
3PDE 100'x100' 6 1.4  
 
4PDE 200'x100' 4 1.8  
 
Subtotal (acres) 5.7 37.1  
*Temporary access roads are not included in the total acreage disturbance, due to all instances occurring 
within temporary structure work area. The project will have approximately 0.38 miles of temporary 
access roads.  
 
Table 2 – Geotechnical Boring Disturbance Breakdown 
Project 
Component 
Facility 
Type 
Dimensions 
(feet) 
Number 
of Each 
Permanent 
Disturbance 
(acres) 
Temporary 
Disturbance 
(acres) 
 
Temporary 
Work Areas 
Temporary 
Work Pad 100x100 3   0.69  
Access Roads Temporary N/A 0.402 
miles   1.17  
Subtotal (acres) 0 1.86*  
*This disturbance falls within the temporary or permanent disturbance already outlined for the 
project, and as such is not considered additional for the purposes of the disturbance calculation 
 
[[page 4]]
DOI-BLM-NV-S010-2026-0068-DNA  4 
Access: 
Access to the Project site is via U.S. Highway 95, exiting west on Eldorado Valley Drive, paved 
roads near the Sloan Canyon Substation, transitioning to an unpaved road that leads directly to 
the project area.  These roads will be used throughout the construction phase and for subsequent 
operation and maintenance. No road widening of existing assets is expected as part of 
maintenance activities.  Approximately 1 mile of new access will be established to support 
construction, operation, and maintenance of the loop-in project and approximately one half (0.5) 
mile of temporary access will be used to support construction. The standard design for access 
roads, in general, shall be twenty-four (24) feet wide, which will include a 20-foot drivable 
surface and a 2-foot berm or ditch on either side. 
For geotechnical evaluations, overland access will be used to reach the boring locations. This 
overland access will be drive-and-crush with a 24 foot wide drivable area used for disturbance 
calculations. This will be for approximately 0.4 miles total, as shown in Table 2.  
Construction: 
Construction is expected to occur in phases to accommodate existing utility outage restrictions.  
The line will cross multiple high-voltage lines in the utility corridor.  Initial construction is 
scheduled to begin in Q3 2026 and conclude in Q4 2027, with long durations of no activity. The 
total construction period will span approximately 12 - 16 months and will likely occur in phases 
due to utility outage sequence requirements. The construction workforce is expected to average 
15 to 25 personnel, with peak numbers reaching up to 40. Daily construction activities will occur 
6 days per week, 10–12 hours per day, with potential for night shifts in extreme heat conditions. 
If noxious weeds are found prior to construction, a BLM approved herbicide will be used if 
necessary.  
During construction, staging areas will occur on the previously outlined temporary disturbance 
areas, or at one of the designated laydown yards. 
The equipment required for construction is similar to that used to construct the existing Harry 
Allen – Eldorado Transmission Line, including pick-up trucks, motor graders, dozers, rollers, 
excavators, front loaders, pier foundation augers, cranes, bucket trucks, trenching machines, 
helicopters, concrete trucks, water trucks, and pull and tension machines.  
Construction sequence: 
• Site survey and staking 
• Sensitive biological species clearance 
• Grading and excavation 
• Structure foundation installation 
• Structure assembly and erection 
[[page 5]]
DOI-BLM-NV-S010-2026-0068-DNA  5 
• Line stringing and tensioning 
• Cleanup and reclamation 
Waste: 
All construction-related waste will be managed per federal, state, and local regulations. Waste 
materials, including concrete washout, packaging, used equipment, and trash, will be stored in 
covered dumpsters and transported to approved disposal facilities. No open burning will occur. 
Spill response and stormwater pollution prevention plans will be implemented. Portable toilets 
will be used and serviced regularly. 
Reclamation: 
Reclamation will occur upon construction completion and will include regrading, topsoil 
redistribution, and reseeding with a BLM-approved, weed-free seed mix. Vegetation removed 
during construction may be reused as mulch. Temporary disturbance areas will be restored to 
approximate adjacent conditions to support vegetation regrowth. 
Maintenance and Operation: 
DesertLink will perform or contract with an experienced utility company to operate and maintain 
the facilities.  For example, NV Energy currently operates and maintains the Harry Allen to 
Eldorado Line. Maintenance activities will include routine inspections (via vehicles or drones), 
component replacements, and road upkeep within the authorized ROW. Equipment that may be 
used includes backhoes, graders, utility trucks, cranes, water trucks, and specialized electrical 
tools. All O&M activities will remain within the authorized ROW. 
This Determination of NEPA Adequacy is being updated to reflect updates to the Existing NEPA 
Best Management Practices (Appendix B), specifically further refinement for those applicable 
Best Management Practices based on consultation conclusions and updates. 
B.  LAND USE PLAN (LUP) CONFORMANCE 
LUP Name: Las Vegas Resource Management Plan Date Approved: October 1998 
The Project is in conformance with the applicable LUP because the emphasis of the Las Vegas 
Resource Management Plan (RMP), October 1998 is to protect unique habitats for threatened, 
endangered, and special status species while providing areas for community growth, recreation, 
mineral exploration and development, and other resource uses. The specific objectives and 
management directions that allow for the Project can be found in Appendix A of the 1998 Las 
Vegas RMP Record of Decision. 
See Land Use Authorizations Objectives (page 18) and Rights-of-Way Management Objectives 
(page 19): 
“LD-2. All public lands within the planning area, unless otherwise classified, segregated 
or withdrawn, and with the exception of Areas of Critical Environmental Concern and 
Wilderness Study Areas, are available at the discretion of the agency, for land use leases 
and permits under Section 302 of Federal Land Policy and Management Act and for 
airport leases under the authority of the Act of May 24, 1928, amended.”  
[[page 6]]
DOI-BLM-NV-S010-2026-0068-DNA  6 
Management Direction: 
“RW-l. Meet public demand and reduce impacts to sensitive resources by providing an 
orderly system of development for transportation, including legal access to private 
inholdings, communications, flood control, major utility transmission lines, and related 
facilities.”  
C.  NEPA AND OTHER RELATED DOCUMENTS 
Multiple NEPA documents analyze substantially the same or similar actions as proposed in the 
Project: 
Programmatic Environmental Assessment for Eldorado Valley Transmission and Utility 
Corridor (DOI-BLM-NV-S010-2012-0024-EA)       Date Approved: November 23, 2012 
A copy of this document can be found on the BLM National NEPA Register at:  
https://eplanning.blm.gov/Project-Home/?id=e67d9f83-a7f2-f011-8407-001dd803d7d3 
Biological Opinion: Southern Nevada District’s Programmatic Biological Opinion 
(08ENVS00-2019F-0153/ 2022-0027339-S7-001) 
A copy of this document can be found on the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service website at: 
https://ecos.fws.gov/tails/pub/document/15398105 
D.  NEPA ADEQUACY CRITERIA 
1. Is the new Project a feature of, or substantially the same as an alternative analyzed in 
the existing environmental document(s)?  
Yes, the Project is substantially similar the same as an alternative analyzed in DOI-BLM-
NV-S010-2012-0024-EA. The existing NEPA analyzed a programmatic approach to 
development of the utility corridors within Eldorado Valley, and one of the uses analyzed 
included transmission lines similar to the Proposed Action.  
2. Is the Project within the same analysis area, or if the location of the proposed action is 
different, are the geographic and resource conditions sufficiently similar to those 
analyzed in the existing environmental document(s)? If there are differences, can you 
explain why they are not substantial? 
Yes, the Project is within the same analysis area as what has been previously analyzed in 
DOI-BLM-NV-S010-2012-0024-EA The Project area for the Proposed Action overlaps 
with the analysis of the existing NEPA. Resource conditions described in Chapter 3 of 
the EA are sufficiently similar to those of the Project, based on resource surveys 
performed in support of the current Project and the absence of new environmental 
concerns or resource values since the existing NEPA was finalized. 
3. Is the range of alternatives analyzed in the existing environmental document(s) 
appropriate with respect to the new proposed action, given current environmental 
concerns and resource values? 
Yes, the range of alternatives analyzed in Chapter 2 of the existing NEPA is appropriate 
with respect to the proposed Project.  
[[page 7]]
DOI-BLM-NV-S010-2026-0068-DNA  7 
The proposed Project area is located among numerous existing high voltage transmission 
lines in a designated utility corridor for which analysis was provided for in the existing 
NEPA. Engineering standards governing the crossing of existing transmission facilities 
limits the ability to consider technically viable alternative locations for the current 
Project. However, due to the location and no environmental concerns or resource values 
beyond those already analyzed in the existing NEPA documents necessitate evaluation of 
additional Project alternatives.  
4. Is existing analysis valid considering any new information or circumstances relevant to 
the proposed action (such as, rangeland health standards assessment, recent 
endangered species listings, updated list of BLM sensitive species)?  Can you reasonably 
conclude that new information and new circumstances do not warrant substantial 
change to the analysis of the new proposed action? 
Yes, the existing analysis is valid considering current information and circumstances. No 
new information or circumstances have arisen since the existing NEPA was finalized. 
There are no new environmental factors that warrant a substantial change to the analysis. 
The Proposed Action would be required to adhere to those applicable best management 
practices from the 2012 EA related to special-status species. The Endangered Species Act 
Section 7 consultation for this project regarding the Federally Listed Mojave desert 
tortoise is covered under the current Programmatic Biological Opinion (File no. 
08ENVS00-2019-F-0153), as appended (File no. 2022-0027339-S7-005) contingent on 
compliance with the Terms and Conditions therein. Terms and conditions and 
minimization measures in the Append to the Programmatic Biological Opinion contain 
measures to avoid and minimize potential impacts, including take, to Mojave desert 
tortoise. A copy of the terms and conditions have been provided with this document (Sec 
7 Log # NV-052-26-082). 
5. Are the environmental effects that would result from implementation of the new 
proposed action similar (both quantitatively and qualitatively) to those analyzed in the 
existing NEPA document? 
Yes, the environmental effects that would result from implementing the proposed Project 
are similar to those analyzed in the existing NEPA. The facilities and actions being 
proposed in the proposed Project are nearly identical to those described and analyzed, but 
limited in scope. The environmental resources present in the proposed Project area 
remain consistent with those described and this was verified by resource surveys 
conducted for the proposed project. Implementing the current Project would not change 
the results of the impact analysis described in the existing NEPA.  
6. Are the public involvement and interagency review associated with existing NEPA 
document(s) adequate for the current proposed action? 
Yes, agency, interagency, and public reviews completed during the NEPA process for the 
analysis of the EA/FONSI for the existing are adequate for the current Project. The 
existing NEPA was made available as a preliminary Environmental Assessment during a 
30 day comment period. There were five comment letters received during this period and 
can be found along with BLM responses in Chapter 9 of the existing NEPA. Additionally 
multiple agencies were contacted were contacted during the preparation of the existing 
[[page 8]]
DOI-BLM-NV-S010-2026-0068-DNA  8 
NEPA. These can be found in Chapter 6 of the EA. The methods and efforts to invite 
public and interagency involvement reviews remains consistent with methods currently 
used. 
E. CONCLUSION 
Determination of NEPA Adequacy: 
☒ Based on the review documented above, I conclude that this proposal conforms to the 
applicable land use plan and that the NEPA documentation fully covers the proposed 
action and constitutes BLM’s compliance with the requirements of the NEPA. 
 
 
Responsible Official: ____________________________________ Date: _______________ 
 
Note: The signed CONCLUSION on this worksheet is part of an interim step in the BLM’s 
internal decision process and does not constitute an appealable decision. However, the lease, 
permit, other authorization, or action based on this DNA may be subject to protest and/or appeal 
under 43 CFR Part 4 or program-specific regulations. 
 
ATTACHMENTS 
Appendix A. Maps 
Appendix B. Southern Nevada District Office (SNDO) Stipulations and Mitigation Measures  
Appendix C. Applicant Proposed Measures 
 
[[page 9]]
Appendix A. Maps 
 

[[page 10]]
DOI-BLM-NV-S010-2026-0068-DNA  10 
  

[[page 11]]
DOI-BLM-NV-S010-2026-0068-DNA  11 
Appendix B. Existing NEPA Best Management Practices 
The following practices would reduce impacts as stated in the existing NEPA these should be 
used when applicable to the Proposed Action.  
Land Use Best Management Practices 
LAND-1: Minimize Restricted Access to Existing Land Uses. To the extent possible, 
applicants shall not restrict access to existing land uses in or near the study area during 
construction or operation. 
LAND-2: Comply with Land Use Restrictions in the Study Area. Applicants shall comply 
with all land use restrictions in the study area, such as speed limits, and shall fully comply 
with the Amendment to the Interlocal Agreement between Clark County and Boulder City, 
including Exhibit D, regarding the BCCE. 
LAND-3: Obtain Approval from Appropriate Jurisdiction for Activities Outside of BLM 
Transmission and Utility Corridors in the Study Area. Applicants shall obtain approval from 
Clark County and the City of Boulder City for activities outside of BLM’s transmission and 
utility corridors in the study area. 
Special Status Species Best Management Practices 
BIO-1: Avoidance. Final tower, spur road, and pipeline trench locations shall be adjusted to 
avoid sensitive biological resources to the greatest extent feasible. 
BIO-2: Preconstruction Surveys. The applicant shall conduct preconstruction surveys using 
BLM-approved biologists according to the most current BLM protocols (with USFWS 
protocols applied for desert tortoise), where available by species. These surveys shall include 
surveying brush clearing areas and ground disturbance areas within habitat deemed suitable 
for sensitive species by a qualified biologist. These surveys shall be conducted for the 
presence of special-status plants, and the presence of general and special status wildlife 
species to prevent direct loss of vegetation and wildlife. 
BIO-3: Flagging. Biological monitors shall be assigned to construction zones containing 
sensitive biological resources. The monitors shall be responsible for ensuring that impacts on 
special-status species, native vegetation, wildlife habitat, or unique resources would be 
avoided to the fullest extent possible. Where appropriate, monitors shall flag the boundaries 
of areas where activities would need to be restricted in order to protect native plants and 
wildlife or special-status species. Those restricted areas shall be monitored to ensure their 
protection during construction. A minimum of one monitor per crew is needed for 
construction crews using heavy equipment (e.g., backhoes, large trucks). One roving monitor 
shall monitor multiple times per day in other active construction zones where heavy 
equipment is not in use. 
BIO-4: Worker Environmental Awareness Program (WEAP). The applicant shall design 
a WEAP, and all construction crews and contractors shall participate in WEAP training prior 
to starting work on any project. The WEAP training shall include a review of the special-
status species and other sensitive resources that could exist in the project area, the locations 
of sensitive biological resources and their legal status and protections, and measures to be 
implemented for avoidance of these sensitive resources. A record of all trained personnel 
shall be maintained. 
[[page 12]]
DOI-BLM-NV-S010-2026-0068-DNA  12 
BIO-5: Desert Tortoise Measures. The applicant or a qualified consultant shall provide for 
the following to reduce impacts on desert tortoise: 
• The applicant cannot begin construction until confirmation that the Project is authorized 
under the existing Southern Nevada District Programmatic Biological Opinion 
(08ENVS00-2019-F-0153); or a new project-specific appended Biological Opinion and 
NDOW authorization. Additionally, compliance discussions with Clark County and 
Boulder City must occur prior to construction that resolve and outline the specific 
compensation fees or additional mitigation measures needed for loss of desert tortoise 
habitat outside of BLM transmission and utility corridors within the BCCE. A copy of the 
USFWS Biological Opinion and documentation of any compliance discussions with 
Clark County and Boulder City should be provided to the BLM. 
• Construction monitoring shall employ a designated field contact representative, approved 
by the BLM during the construction phase. A field contact representative is defined as a 
person designated by the project proponent who is responsible for overseeing compliance 
with desert tortoise protective measures and for coordination with agency compliance 
officer(s). The field contact representative shall also oversee all compliance 
documentation including daily observation reports, non-compliance and corrective action 
reports, and final reporting to any authorized agency upon project completion. 
• Construction monitoring shall employ an authorized biologist(s) and qualified 
biologist(s) approved by the USFWS during the construction phase. At a minimum, 
qualified biologist(s) shall be present during all activities in which encounters with 
tortoises could occur. A qualified biologist is defined as a person with appropriate 
education, training, and experience to conduct tortoise surveys, monitor project activities, 
provide worker education programs, and supervise or perform other implementing 
actions. An authorized biologist is defined as a wildlife biologist who has been authorized 
to handle desert tortoises by the USFWS. 
• Qualified and/or authorized biologists shall conduct preconstruction surveys according to 
the most current USFWS protocol at the time of construction. 
• Qualified and/or authorized biologists shall monitor all construction activities year-round 
in desert tortoise habitat, regardless of the time of year or weather conditions, as tortoises 
are often active outside of their "active" season. 
• Authorized biologists shall handle desert tortoises following the most current Desert 
Tortoise Council handling guidelines (2009 or newer). 
• All work area boundaries associated with temporary and permanent disturbances shall be 
conspicuously staked, flagged, or otherwise marked to minimize surface disturbance 
activities. All workers shall strictly limit activities and vehicles to the designated work 
areas. 
• Crushing/removal of perennial vegetation in work areas shall be avoided to the maximum 
extent practicable. 
• All trash and food items generated by construction and maintenance activities shall be 
promptly contained and regularly removed from the project site(s) to reduce the 
attractiveness of the area to common ravens. 
[[page 13]]
DOI-BLM-NV-S010-2026-0068-DNA  13 
• Pets shall not be allowed in working areas unless restrained in a kennel. 
• Where possible, motor vehicles shall be limited to maintained roads and designated 
routes. Vehicle speed within the project area, along ROW maintenance routes, and along 
existing access roads shall not exceed 20 miles per hour. Speed limits shall be clearly 
marked and all workers shall be made aware of these limits. 
• Preconstruction clearance surveys shall be conducted within 48 hours of initiation of site 
specific project activities, following USFWS protocol (USFWS 2009). The goal of a 
clearance survey is to find all tortoises on the surface and in burrows that could be 
harmed by construction activities. Surveys shall cover 100 percent of the acreage to be 
disturbed. All potential tortoise burrows within 100 feet of construction activity shall be 
marked. 
• Biological monitors shall clear ahead of construction crews in desert tortoise habitat 
during all clearing and grading activities, or during activity where undisturbed vegetation 
would be crushed. In addition, biological monitors shall clear ahead of larger, nonrubber-
tired equipment when that equipment is being driven on access and spur roads. 
• Biological monitors shall clear all active work sites located in desert tortoise habitat each 
morning before construction begins and throughout the day if crews move from 
construction site to construction site. 
• Results of biological monitoring and status of construction shall be detailed in daily 
reports by biological monitors. These reports shall be submitted to the authorized 
biologist on a daily basis and to the field contact representative on a weekly basis (at 
minimum). The authorized biologist shall notify the field contact representative within 24 
hours of any action that involves harm to a desert tortoise. The authorized biologist shall 
submit to the USFWS, NDOW, and the BLM a summary of all desert tortoises seen, 
injured, killed, excavated, and handled at the end of each project or within 2 working 
days of when desert tortoises are harmed. GPS locations of live tortoises shall be 
reported. 
• Should any desert tortoise be injured or killed, all activities shall be halted, and the field 
contact representative and/or authorized biologist immediately contacted. The field 
contact representative and/or authorized biologist shall be responsible for reporting the 
incident to the authorizing agencies. 
• Desert tortoise relocations shall only occur from an active construction zone to an area 
that is not under active construction. Any tortoise found on the surface shall be relocated 
to less than 1,000 feet away. Tortoises shall be handled carefully following the guidelines 
given in USFWS Desert Tortoise Field Manual (USFWS 2009). Tortoises shall be 
handled with new latex gloves each time to avoid transmission of disease, and handlers 
shall especially note guidelines for precautions to be taken during high-temperature 
periods. 
• If a potential tortoise burrow were required to be excavated, the biologist shall proceed 
according to the guidelines given in USFWS Desert Tortoise Field Manual (USFWS 
2009). Tortoises removed from burrows shall be relocated to a natural unoccupied 
burrow or an artificial burrow (USFWS 2009). The tortoise shall be block in the burrow 
[[page 14]]
DOI-BLM-NV-S010-2026-0068-DNA  14 
in accordance to the guideline given in the USFWS Desert Tortoise Field Manual 
(USFWS 2009). 
• For activities conducted between March 15 and November 1 in desert tortoise habitat, all 
activities in which encounters with tortoises might occur shall be monitored by a 
qualified or authorized biologist. The biologist shall be informed of tortoises relocated 
during preconstruction surveys so that he or she could watch for the relocated tortoises in 
case they attempted to return to the construction site. The qualified or authorized 
biologist shall watch for tortoises wandering into the construction areas, check under 
vehicles, examine excavations and other potential pitfalls for entrapped animals, examine 
exclusion fencing, and conduct other activities to ensure that death or injuries of tortoises 
were minimized. 
• No overnight hazards to desert tortoises (e.g., auger holes, trenches, pits, or other steep 
sided depressions) shall be left unfenced or uncovered; such hazards shall be eliminated 
each day prior to the work crew and biologist leaving the site. Large or long-term project 
areas shall be enclosed with tortoise-proof fencing. Fencing shall be removed when 
restoration of the site is completed. 
• Any incident considered by the biological monitor to be in non-compliance with the 
mitigation plan shall be documented immediately by the biological monitor. The field 
contact representative shall ensure that appropriate corrective action was taken. 
Corrective actions shall be documented by the monitor. The following incidents shall 
require immediate cessation of the construction activities causing the incident, including 
(1) imminent threat of injury or death to a desert tortoise; (2) unauthorized handling of a 
desert tortoise, regardless of intent; (3) operation of construction equipment or vehicles 
outside a project area cleared of desert tortoise, except on designated roads; and (4) 
conducting any construction activity without a biological monitor where one was 
required. If the monitor and field contact representative do not agree, the federal agency's 
compliance officer shall be contacted for resolution. All parties could refer the resolution 
to the federal agency's authorized officer. 
• All construction personnel, including subcontractors, shall complete a WEAP. This 
instruction shall include specific desert tortoise training on distribution, general behavior 
and ecology, identification, protection measures, reporting requirements, and protections 
afforded by state and federal endangered species acts. 
• Parked vehicles shall be inspected prior to being moved. If a tortoise were found beneath 
a vehicle, the authorized biologist shall be contacted to move the animal from harm’s 
way, or the vehicle shall not be moved until the desert tortoise left of its own accord. The 
authorized biologist shall be responsible for taking appropriate measures to ensure that 
any desert tortoise moved in this manner was not exposed to temperature extremes that 
could be harmful to the animal. 
• No desert tortoise shall be captured, moved, transported, released, or purposefully caused 
to leave its burrow for whatever reason when the ambient air temperature is above 95° 
Fahrenheit (35° C). If the ambient air temperature exceeds 95° F during handling or 
processing, desert tortoises shall be kept shaded in an environment which does not exceed 
95° F, and the animals shall not be released until ambient air temp

SOURCE: https://blm-eplanninganonconnector-lap.blm.gov/api/Blob_Storage_Download_External (blobUrl /ebfb4bec-8c54-f111-bec6-001dd804183b/Documents/DR_DOI-BLM-NV-S010-2026-0068-DNA_updated_508.pdf) RETRIEVED: 2026-09-24
[Document retrieved through the NEPA Register document download connector; pypdf text extraction, first 5000 characters]

[[page 1]]
 
Las Vegas Field Office  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Decision Record 
DOI-BLM-NV-S010-2026-0068-DNA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DesertLink - Sloan Canyon 500kV Loop-in  
DesertLink LLC 
N-86359 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREPARING OFFICE 
U.S. Department of the Interior 
Bureau of Land Management 
4701 N. Torrey Pines Drive 
Las Vegas, Nevada 89130 
702-515-5000  
[[page 2]]
Decision Record 
DOI-BLM-NV-S010-2026-0068-DNA  2 
UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR 
Bureau of Land Management 
Las Vegas Field Office 
4701 N Torrey Pines Drive 
Las Vegas, NV 89130 
 
DECISION RECORD 
for DesertLink - Sloan Canyon 500kV Loop-in 
DOI-BLM-NV-S010-2026-0068-DNA 
August 11, 2026 
 
I. DECISION  
The Bureau of Land Management Las Vegas Field Office authorizes the issuance of the Right-
of-Way (ROW) as described in detail in DOI-BLM-NV-S010-2026-0068-DNA. All best 
management practices and monitoring requirements are incorporated into this decision by 
reference to DOI-BLM-NV-S010-2026-0068-DNA. 
The Proposed Action is for DesertLink, LLC to obtain a Right-of-Way (ROW) to construct, 
operate, and maintain the Sloan Canyon 500 kV Loop Project, which includes both permanent 
and temporary disturbances. The project involves the installation of 12 self-supporting steel pole 
structures, the construction of approximately 1 mile of new permanent access roads, and 
approximately one half (0.5) mile of temporary access roads. The Project is designed to 
interconnect the expanded Sloan Canyon Substation with the existing Harry Allen–Eldorado 500 
kV transmission line. In total, the Project will cause 5.7 acres of permanent disturbance and 37.1 
acres of temporary disturbance on public and private lands in Clark County, Nevada, within a 
Designated Utility Corridor. More details can be found in Table 1 below.  
Additionally, prior to the commencement of construction, geotechnical borings will be 
completed on Boulder City owned property. A total of 2 borings will be completed on Boulder 
City owned lands. Borings will drilled up to 70 feet deep. More details can be found in Table 2 
and the access section below.  
The Determination of NEPA Adequacy is being updated to reflect updates to the Existing NEPA 
Best Management Practices (Appendix B), specifically further refinement for those applicable 
Best Management Practices based on consultation conclusions and updates. 
I. COMPLIANCE AND CONFORMANCE  
The Project is in conformance with the applicable LUP because the emphasis of the Las Vegas 
Resource Management Plan (RMP), approved October 1998, is to protect unique habitats for 
threatened, endangered, and special status species while providing areas for community growth, 
recreation, mineral exploration and development, and other resource uses. The specific 
objectives and management directions that allow for the Project can be found in Appendix A of 
the 1998 Las Vegas RMP Record of Decision. 
[[page 3]]
Decision Record 
DOI-BLM-NV-S010-2026-0068-DNA  3 
See Land Use Authorizations Objectives (page 18) and Rights-of-Way Management Objectives 
(page 19): 
“LD-2. All public lands within the planning area, unless otherwise classified, segregated or 
withdrawn, and with the exception of Areas of Critical Environmental Concern and 
Wilderness Study Areas, are available at the discretion of the agency, for land use leases and 
permits under Section 302 of Federal Land Policy and Management Act and for airport leases 
under the authority of the Act of May 24, 1928, amended.”  
Management Direction: 
“RW-l. Meet public demand and reduce impacts to sensitive resources by providing an 
orderly system of development for transportation, including legal access to private 
inholdings, communications, flood control, major utility transmission lines, and related 
facilities.”  
III. RATIONALE FOR DECISION  
Based on my review of the Determination of NEPA Adequacy, I have determined that it supports 
an informed and reasoned decision to authorize the ROW based on factors including, but not 
limited to: 
• The Proposed Action has been evaluated as a Determination of NEPA Adequacy (DNA) 
in compliance with the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA):  
• The Proposed Action is a feature of, or essentially similar to, the actions analyzed in 
Programmatic Environmental Assessment for Eldorado Valley Transmission and Utility 
Corridor (DOI-BLM-NV-S010-2012-0024-EA ) Date Approved: November 23, 2012  
• A BLM interdisciplinary team reviewed the Proposed Action, applicable BLM Southern 
Nevada District standard stipulations and mitigation measures and the proposed action is 
covered by Programmatic Biological Opinion (08ENVS00-2019-F-0153/ 2022-0027339-
S7-001) terms and conditions.  
• Approval of the Proposed Action is authorized by Title V of the Federal Land Policy and 
Management Act of 1976 and 43 CFR Part 2800.  
IV. RIGHT OF PROTEST AND/OR APPEAL:  
This decision may be appealed to the Interior Board of Land Appeals (IBLA), Office of Hearings
