SOURCE: https://eplanning.blm.gov/Project-Home/?id=a534b60a-7637-f111-88b4-001dd8084607 RETRIEVED: 2026-09-24
[BLM National NEPA Register project page, Project Information section]
Project Information 
NEPA Number
DOI-BLM-NV-C020-2026-0012-EA
Project Name
Silver Springs 345-Kv Fold project
Project Type
EA
NEPA Status
Completed - Completed
Lead Office
Sierra Front Field Office
Last Updated
07/27/2026 - 12:00 AM
What's New
None
Project Location
City
State/Territory
Zip Code
County(ies)
Silver Springs
Nevada
89429
Lyon
Application Information
Program
Lands and Realty
Sub-Program
Rights-of-Way
Project Dates
Start Date
4/13/2026
Decision Date
6/12/2026
NEPA Completion Date
6/12/2026
FONSI Date
6/12/2026

SOURCE: https://blm-eplanninganonconnector-lap.blm.gov/api/Blob_Storage_Download_External (blobUrl /0d48cb0e-96f2-f011-8407-001dd80c29f3/Documents/Silver-Springs 345-kV_DR_20260528_508.pdf) RETRIEVED: 2026-09-24
[Document retrieved through the NEPA Register document download connector; pypdf text extraction]

[[page 1]]
Decision Record  1
DOI-BLM-NV-C020-2026-0012-EA
UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR
Bureau of Land Management
Carson City District
Sierra Front Field Office
5665 Morgan Mill Road
Carson City, NV 89701
DECISION RECORD
for
Silver Springs 345-kilovolt Fold Project
DOI-BLM-NV-C020-2026-0012-EA
May 2026
I. DECISION
Based on my review of Environmental Assessment DOI-BLM-NV-C020-2026-0012-EA and 
supporting documents, this action will not result in significant impacts to the quality of the 
human environment. Therefore, an Environmental Impact Statement will not be prepared.
I have decided to authorize the Proposed Action (Selected Action) as described in Section 2.1 of 
the EA. The decision will grant NV Energy a 160-foot-wide permanent right-of-way (ROW) and 
300-foot-wide temporary construction ROW to construct, operate, and maintain a 345-kV 
transmission line fold to connect to the proposed Greenlink West Project and the anticipated 
Nighthawk substation, as well as associated transmission line access and maintenance roads on 
public lands in Silver Springs, Nevada. This authorization will include standard stipulations and 
Applicant-committed measures.
The complete description of the Selected Action will be referenced in Section 2.1 of the EA. As 
explained in the Finding of No Significant Impact (FONSI), the impacts of the Selected Action 
have been analyzed in the EA and determined not to result in significant impacts to the quality of 
the human environment. 
Based on information in the EA and consultation with my staff, I have determined that the 
Selected Action conforms to the applicable Carson City Field Office Consolidated Resource 
Management Plan (CRMP) will result in no significant impacts. Therefore, the Selected Action 
will proceed as described in Section 2.1 of the EA.
A. Mitigation Measures
The standard stipulations and Applicant-committed measures found in Section 2.1.9 of the EA will 
need to be adhered to throughout Project activities. 
B. Monitoring
1. NV Energy has designated an Environmental Compliance Team to monitor 
construction activities and track compliance with the measures listed in Section 2.1.9 
of the EA, the BLM authorization, and other permits.
[[page 2]]
Decision Record  2
DOI-BLM-NV-C020-2026-0012-EA
II. COMPLIANCE AND CONFORMANCE
This decision will comply with all applicable laws, regulations, and policies, including the 
National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), the Federal Land Policy and Management Act 
(FLPMA), and Bureau of Land Management (BLM) regulations at 43 CFR Part 2800 governing 
ROWs on public lands. 
The Selected Action will conform to the Carson City Field Office CRMP and the Lyon County 
Master Plan, as required by 43 CFR 1610.5-3(a). The EA analyzed the Project and determined 
that the Selected Action is consistent with the goals, objectives, and management decisions 
outlined in the land use plan, as discussed in Section 1.4 of the EA. No amendments to the plan 
will be necessary. 
Consultation and coordination requirements under Section 106 of the National Historic 
Preservation Act, Endangered Species Act, and other applicable statutes have been completed. 
All stipulations and Applicant-committed measures identified in the EA will be incorporated into 
the ROW grant to ensure compliance with these requirements.
III. PUBLIC INVOLVEMENT
The Project was posted to ePlanning on April 13, 2026. No public comment period or notification 
process occurred. Information on federal, state, and local agency coordination and tribal 
consultation is provided in Section 4.0 of the EA. 
IV. RATIONALE FOR DECISION 
The Selected Action includes a 160-foot-wide permanent ROW and 300-foot-wide temporary 
construction ROW to construct, operate, and maintain a 345-kV transmission line fold to connect 
to the proposed Greenlink West Project and the anticipated Nighthawk substation, as well as 
associated transmission line access and maintenance roads. As explained in the FONSI, the 
impacts of the Selected Action have been analyzed in the EA and determined not to result in 
significant impacts to the quality of the human environment. All effects remain below regulatory 
and biological thresholds and the scale of disturbance will be small and temporary. Applicant-
committed measures and design features will ensure no significant or precedent-setting effects 
occur, with uncertainty addressed through monitoring and management plans. 
Based on the information presented in the EA and consultation with my staff, I will approve the 
Proposed Action (Selected Action) as described in Chapter 2.1 of the EA. This decision is based 
on the determination that the Project conforms to the applicable land use plan and will result in 
no significant impacts. Therefore, the Selected Action will proceed as outlined in Chapter 2.1 of 
the EA.
V. RIGHT OF PROTEST AND/OR APPEAL:  
Administrative remedies are available to those who believe they will be adversely affected by this 
decision. This decision may be appealed to the Interior Board of Appeals (IBLA), Office of the 
Solicitor, in accordance with the regulations contained in 43 CFR Part 4 and BLM Form 1842-001 
(July 2025). 
[[page 3]]
Decision Record  3
DOI-BLM-NV-C020-2026-0012-EA
If you choose to appeal: 
· Notice of Appeal must be filed in this office (see the above address) within 30 days of 
receipt of this decision. 
· The Notice of Appeal, Decision Being Appealed, Statement of Standing, Statement of 
Timeliness, and a Petition for a Stay, if applicable, must be filed with the IBLA.
VI. APPROVAL
                                                                       ______________________________
Matthew E. Magaletti
Sierra Front Field Manager  Date

SOURCE: https://blm-eplanninganonconnector-lap.blm.gov/api/Blob_Storage_Download_External (blobUrl /0d48cb0e-96f2-f011-8407-001dd80c29f3/Documents/Silver Springs 345-kV_FONSI_20260528_508.pdf) RETRIEVED: 2026-09-24
[Document retrieved through the NEPA Register document download connector; pypdf text extraction]

[[page 1]]
FONSI  1
DOI-BLM-NV-C020-2026-0012-EA
UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR
Bureau of Land Management
Carson City District
Sierra Front Field Office
5665 Morgan Mill Road
Carson City, NV 89701
FINDING OF NO SIGNIFICANT IMPACT
for Silver Springs 345-kilovolt Fold Project
DOI-BLM-NV-C020-2026-0012-EA
INTRODUCTION:
The Bureau of Land Management (BLM) received a Standard Form 299 Application for 
Transportation and Utility Systems and Facilities on Federal Lands in September 2024 
requesting authorization to construct and operate a 345-kilovolt (kV) transmission line fold 
across BLM-administered land in Lyon County, Nevada.  NV Energy (Applicant) has requested 
a grant of right-of-way (ROW) for the Silver Springs 345-kV Fold Project (Project) located in 
Silver Springs, Lyon County, Nevada. 
An environmental assessment (EA) DOI-BLM-NV-C020-2026-0012-EA was prepared for the 
Project to disclose and analyze the potential environmental effects of the Proposed Action and 
No Action Alternative. This Finding of No Significant Impact (FONSI) applies to the Proposed 
Action as described in Section 2.1 of the attached EA. 
The Proposed Action would provide for a 160-foot-wide permanent ROW and a 300-foot-wide 
temporary construction ROW to NV Energy to construct, operate, and maintain a 345-kV 
transmission line fold to connect to the proposed Greenlink West Project and the anticipated 
Nighthawk substation, as well as associated transmission line access and maintenance roads. 
Also included in the Proposed Action is geotechnical exploration consisting of vertical 
exploratory borings within the permanent ROW to obtain physical characteristics for final 
structure design. NV Energy would implement all the environmental protection measures 
(EPMs) outlined in Section 2.1.9 of the EA. The Project area encompasses a total of 
approximately 540.6 acres, comprised of 387.9 acres of BLM-administered land and 152.7 acres 
of private land in Lyon County. 
FINDING OF NO SIGNIFICANT IMPACT:
Based on my review of the attached DOI-BLM-NV-C020-2026-0012-EA and supporting 
documents, I have determined that the Proposed Action will not significantly affect the quality of 
the human environment. Therefore, an environmental impact statement (EIS) is not required. 
This finding is based on the degree of the effects described in the following sections within the 
identified affected environment.
[[page 2]]
FONSI  2
DOI-BLM-NV-C020-2026-0012-EA
Potentially Affected Environment 
The potentially affected environment for the Project encompasses BLM-administered lands and 
private lands within Lyon County, Nevada and is described in detail throughout Section 3.0 of 
the EA. The area includes unique features such as 16 archaeological resources within the Project 
Area, of which 12 are not eligible for the National Register of Historic Places and four remain 
unevaluated. No threatened, endangered, or candidate species were identified in the Project Area; 
however, two potential golden eagle (Aquila chrysaetos) nests have been observed within one 
mile of the Project Area, one burrowing owl (Athene cunicularia) and occupied burrow was 
observed during baseline surveys, and special status plant surveys identified the Nevada suncup 
(Camissonia nevadensis) in the area. There are no wetlands within the Project Area; there are 
several channels present within the Project Area that have been determined to be ephemeral and 
do not convey relatively permanent, standing, or continuous flow.
The Project’s disturbance footprint is relatively small, making up less than 0.05 percent of Lyon 
County.  Effects on the environment are minimized through implementation of EPMs and are 
generally limited in scale compared to the broader landscape. The EA organizes findings by 
resource, providing quantitative and qualitative context for each resource potentially affected by 
the Project. 
Degree of Effects 
The following have been considered in my evaluation of the selected alternative:
i. Short- and long-term effects 
The selected Proposed Action will cause short-term effects during construction (about 16 
months), such as temporary visual disturbance, noise, vegetation and soil disturbance, wildlife 
habitat loss, and increased vehicle activity. These effects are minimized because construction is 
temporary, and EPMs will be implemented such as time restrictions to avoid sensitive periods, 
best management practices for erosion and sediment control, and revegetation of disturbed areas. 
Long-term effects, lasting for the operational life of the transmission line, include the presence of 
new structures, managed vegetation, and minor permanent habitat loss. Design features like 
revegetation, avoidance buffers, and ongoing monitoring ensure that both short- and long-term 
effects remain below regulatory and biological thresholds and are not considered significant. 
ii. Beneficial and adverse effects 
a) Air Resources
Expected emission sources include non-road construction equipment, on-road construction 
workers commuting to/from the work site, and material delivery trucks. Based on the 
conservatively modeled emissions detailed in Section 3.3 of the EA, the Project would not result 
in major emissions of the modeled criteria pollutants, HAPs, or GHGs compared to relative 
federal and state thresholds. Overall, effects to air quality as a result of the Proposed Action are 
anticipated to be minimal because the emissions are below thresholds and the Project includes 
EPMs to control fugitive dust, as outlined in Section 2.1.8.10 of the EA.
[[page 3]]
FONSI  3
DOI-BLM-NV-C020-2026-0012-EA
b) Cultural Resources and Native American Religious Concerns
Archaeological monitoring would be in place for known historic properties near power pole 
locations. Implementation of the survey, reporting, and measures described in the EPMs (Section 
2.1.9.8 of the EA) would ensure that any previously known or newly recorded cultural resources 
would be avoided by access and construction activities. Wherever possible, cultural sites 
identified as eligible for inclusion on the National Register of Historic Places would be avoided. 
Where avoidance is not possible, a Historic Properties Treatment Plan would be developed 
through consultation among the BLM, the Nevada State Historic Preservation Office, and 
applicable Tribes.
c) Fire and Fuels Management
A fire management strategy will be developed to implement measures to minimize the potential 
for a human-caused fire during construction, operation, and maintenance. The strategy will 
consider the need to reduce hazardous fuels (e.g., native and non-native annual grasses and 
shrubs) and to prevent the spread of fires started inside the corridor. A Wildland Fire 
Preparedness and Protection Plan is also given to all contractors prior to construction start. 
Additional details about the Project’s fire prevention and response EPMs are included in Section 
2.1.9.11 of the EA. With the implementation of EPMs, effects from the Proposed Action on fire 
and fuels management are not anticipated. Fire safety training and inspections will promote 
public health. 
d) Soil and Vegetation Resources, including Special Status Species, Noxious Weeds, and 
Invasive or Non-native Species
The Project would disturb up to 540.6 acres of vegetation communities and soils. Buffers would 
be established if sensitive plant species are identified during construction. Effects to soils and 
vegetation would be minimal because BMPs and EPMs would be implemented to control runoff, 
erosion, noxious and invasive plant species, and reseed and reclaim disturbed soils and 
vegetation.
e) Trails and Travel Management
The Project would utilize existing roads where available within the proposed ROW that would be 
evaluated for potential improvements to accommodate construction. Overall, adverse effects to 
trails and travel management as a result of the Proposed Action are not anticipated because 
surface disturbances would not occur within the existing NDOT ROW for USA Parkway and the 
California National Historic Trail segment within the area of analysis is not present within the 
Project Area, therefore disturbance within this segment would not occur. Improved access roads 
may benefit recreation and land management. 
f) Visual Resource Management
The Project would result in moderate alterations to the existing landscape; however, the new 
transmission line and associated access roads would not dominate the viewshed as they would be 
absorbed by the landscape due to existing utility infrastructure in the vicinity. Visual effects 
anticipated from construction activities of the project would be temporary. The proposed Project 
would be in conformance with the interim Visual Resource Management Class IV objectives and 
would ultimately conform with the existing land uses in the area of analysis.
[[page 4]]
FONSI  4
DOI-BLM-NV-C020-2026-0012-EA
g) Wildlife Resources, including Special Status Species and Migratory Birds
There will be temporary and permanent loss of up to 540.6 acres of wildlife habitat. Following 
construction activities, areas of disturbed land no longer required for Project operations would be 
reclaimed to promote reestablishment of wildlife habitat. Effects would be minimal because 
disturbed areas would be reclaimed after construction, surveys would be conducted for special 
status species and migratory birds, and buffers would be implemented to avoid construction 
during sensitive periods. 
h) Rationale for Non-Significance
All effects remain below regulatory and biological thresholds and the scale of disturbance will be 
small and temporary. EPMs and design features will ensure no significant or precedent-setting 
effects occur, with uncertainty addressed through monitoring and management plans. 
iii. Effects on public health and safety 
The Proposed Action would comply with BLM’s policy and guidelines, and other federal state, 
and local laws. EPMs presented in Section 2.1.9 of the EA will further reduce effects on public 
health and safety. 
Hazardous and solid wastes generated during construction will be managed according to local, 
state, and federal regulations, with standard operating procedures in place to ensure proper 
containment and disposal. A Spill Prevention, Control, and Countermeasures Plan will be 
implemented for the Project. Air quality impacts are minimal, with emissions estimated to be 
below state and federal regulatory thresholds and a Fugitive Dust Control Plan will be 
implemented. Water quality will be protected through best management practices, including 
sediment and erosion control, outlined in the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan, and no 
wetlands are present in the Project Area.
iv. Economic effects
The construction of the Project may stimulate minor, temporary economic activity in Silver 
Springs, and/or the surrounding communities due to the presence of temporary construction 
employees and their purchasing of goods. However, the Project is not antici pated to increase the 
employment or income levels of the area of analysis to a noticeable level. An increase in long -
term economic activity could occur as a result of the Project due to the increase in utility 
development in the area of analysis; however, the level to which it may contribute to long -term 
economic activity is unknown at this time due to future transmission line connectivity being 
currently unknown. 
The Proposed Action will not have significant negative economic effects. The Project is proposed 
to support the growth in the Silver Springs area. 
v. Effects on the quality of life of the American people.
The Project may affect quality of life within the area of analysis associated with changes in 
scenery, recreational access, solitude, and nature. However, the Project area is within a Lyon 
County locally designated utility corridor. The new transmission line and associated access roads 
would not dominate the viewshed as they would be absorbed by the landscape due to existing 
utility infrastructure in the vicinity. Although construction activities may affect solitude and 
[[page 5]]
FONSI  5
DOI-BLM-NV-C020-2026-0012-EA
recreation opportunities in the area, these impacts would be temporary.  Cultural and ecological 
values will be protected through avoidance and reclamation.
The Project would provide an increase in regional power capacity and availability for potentially 
several end users upon completion of construction, which may provide a beneficial impact to the 
area and a potential for increased development and services due to additional power utility 
connection opportunities.
Any changes to quality of life will be small, short-term, and offset by long-term benefits. Overall, 
effects on the quality of life will not be significant.
Matthew E. Magaletti
Sierra Front Field Manager    Date
