SOURCE: https://eplanning.blm.gov/Project-Home/?id=8987f6d4-a7f2-f011-8407-001dd80db62a RETRIEVED: 2026-09-24
[BLM National NEPA Register project page, Project Information section]
Project Information 
NEPA Number
DOI-BLM-NV-C000-2023-0003-EA
Project Name
Reno to Las Vegas Fiber Optic Project
Project Type
EA
NEPA Status
Completed - Completed
Lead Office
Carson City District Office
Last Updated
Project Description
The proposed action associated with this right-of-way includes the construction activities and operations associated with the development of an approximately 450-mile-long buried fiber optic line spanning from Reno to Las Vegas. The proposed project includes the construction of the fiber optic line by plowing, trenching, or boring techniques and the construction of nine inline amplifier buildings. The project area and ROW would include approximately 58 acres. This proposed buried fiber optic line would cross through Washoe, Lyon, Storey, Churchill, Mineral, Nye, Esmeralda, and Clark Counties in Nevada. The proposed project would be located within existing rights-of-way that predominantly follow U.S. Highways 50 and 95; Nevada State Highways 160, 839, and 439; and county-maintained roads from Reno to Las Vegas.
What's New
The Decision Record (DR) and Finding of No Significant Impact (FONSI) for the portions of the proposed route located on BLM-administered public lands have been signed and can be found on the Documents page.
The Plan of Development and associated appendices have been uploaded to the Documents page.
**An error in the DR was brought to our attention regarding the length of the long-term ROW grant; the original text stated that it was a 50-year grant when it was supposed to be a 30-year grant. That typo has been corrected in the DR that was posted in the Documents page on 6/10/2024.**
Project Location
City
State/Territory
Zip Code
County(ies)
Reno
Nevada
89502
Washoe County
Application Information
Applicant
Vero Fiber Networks
Program
Lands and Realty
Sub-Program
Rights-of-Way
Project Dates
Start Date
3/20/2023
Decision Date
3/6/2024
NEPA Completion Date
3/7/2024
FONSI Date
3/6/2024

SOURCE: https://blm-eplanninganonconnector-lap.blm.gov/api/Blob_Storage_Download_External (blobUrl /2024041/200549464/20113450/251013441/Vero_DecisionRecord_Updated.pdf) RETRIEVED: 2026-09-24
[Document retrieved through the NEPA Register document download connector; pypdf text extraction]

[[page 1]]
U.S. Department of the Interior 
Bureau of Land Management 
Carson City District 
Stillwater Field Office 
5665 Morgan Mill Road 
Carson City, NV 89701 
Decision Record 
DOI-BLM-NV-C000-2023-0002-EA 
Vero Fiber Networks, LLC 
Reno to Las Vegas Fiber Optic Project 
[[page 2]]
INTRODUCTION 
Vero Fiber Networks, LLC (Vero) has submitted an application for the construction, operation, 
and repair and maintenance of a new buried fiber optic conduit and cables that extends from 
Reno to Las Vegas. The proposed route would be approximately 450 miles, 327 miles of which 
would be located on Bureau of Land Management [BLM] managed public lands. 
The overall Project purpose is to provide the infrastructure to improve the quality of rural 
broadband in Nevada. This Project would provide the infrastructure for a direct, low-latency, and 
high bandwidth fiber route, providing a unique and diverse fiber network to existing routes. The 
Project would act as a main linkage for distribution lines throughout the fiber optic system. This 
region needs redundant and alternative bandwidth services to improve network quality and 
reliability associated with existing limited bandwidth infrastructure. 
PROPOSED ACTION 
In addition to the buried fiber optic line, the proposed project would also include in-line 
amplifier buildings, vaults, and line markers along the proposed route. The short-term ROW, 
N-100968-01/NVNVI06240146, would cover the construction of the ROW and the long-term 
ROW, N-100968 / NVNV105856545, would cover the operation and maintenance ofthe fiber 
optic line. The term of the long-term ROW would be 30 years while the term of the short-term 
ROW would be three years. • 
The proposed buried fiber optic line would cross through a mix ofprivate; Nevada State Lands; 
and BLM, Bureau of Reclamation, and U.S. Forest Service administered public lands in Washoe, 
Lyon, Storey, Churchill, Mineral, Nye, Esmeralda, and Clark counties. The proposed project 
would be located within existing rights-of-way that predominantly follow U.S. Highways 50 and 
95; Nevada State Highways 160, 839, and 439; and county-maintained roads from Reno to Las 
Vegas. Appendix D of the EA, DOI-BLM-NV-C000-2023-0003-EA, provides the legal 
description of the proposed fiber optic line of the entire proposed route. 
PROJECT CONSULTATION 
Notification of the BLM's intent to use the "NEPA Substitution" process at 36 CFR 800.S(c) for 
Section 106 consultation was sent to the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation (ACHP) and 
the Nevada State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO) in October of 2022. The BLM, as the 
lead federal agency, is using the NEPA substitution regulations at 36 CFR 800.8 to comply with 
Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA). All consulting parties and/or the 
ACHP can object to the BLM during the public comment period allotted for the EA that the 
BLM has not met the standards as set forth in 36 CFR 800.8(c). The BLM did not receive any 
objections from consulting parties or the ACHP. The BLM provided the Class III reports to the 
Nevada SHPO in October of 2023 and revised the EA based on their comments. The Nevada 
SHPO provided comments during the public comment period that concurred with BLM's 
determinations of eligibility. 
In March of 2022, the BLM sent letters to tribes initiating formal consultation on the proposed 
project, in accordance with the NHPA, NEPA, the American Indian Religious Freedom Act of 
1978, and other legal authorities . The BLM shared the Class III inventory reports with the tribes 
in December 2022, February 2023, March 2023, and August of 2023. The BLM provided the 
initial draft of the EA and associated supplemental environmental reports to the tribes in March 
[[page 3]]
and September of 2023. Formal government to government consultation occurred between the 
BLM and the Reno Sparks Indian Colony and continues. In July of 2023, a field visit to the 
Truckee River crossing at USA Parkway was conducted between the BLM and representatives of 
the Reno Sparks Indian Colony and Pyramid Lake Paiute Tribe. All tribes received electronic 
copies of the Draft Monitoring and Discovery Plan to review. 
A draft biological assessment was prepared and submitted to the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service 
with a request to initiate formal consultation in April of 2023 . The Biological Assessment 
focused on Mojave Desert tortoise as the species of concern with concurrence ofa may affect, 
but, is not likely to adversely affect southwestern willow flycatcher, and yellow-billed cuckoo . 
The biological opinion addressed potential effects to l~sted species, including formal consultation 
for the federally threatened Mojave desert tortoise (Gopherus agassizii), and informal 
consultation for the Southwestern willow flycatcher (Empidonax trail/ii extimus), and yellow­
billed cuckoo (Coccyzus americanus) in accordance with section 7 of the Endangered Species 
Act of 1973 (Act), as amended (16 U.S.C. 1531 et seq.), and 50 CFR § 402 of the interagency 
regulations governing section 7 of the Act. The BO determined that the Project is not likely to 
jeopardize the continued existence of the desert tortoise. No Mojave desert tortoise designated 
critical habitat is present in the action area, thus none will be affected. The U.S. Fish and 
Wildlife Service also concurred with BLM's determination that the project may affect, but is not 
likely to adversely affect the Southwestern willow flycatcher and yellow-billed cuckoo. 
The BO amendment, received in February of 2024, addressed a change to the minimization 
measures applicable to the informal consultation for the Southwestern willow flycatcher and the 
yellow-billed cuckoo. Effects for the proposed action were previously considered in the Informal 
and Formal consultation (File No. File No. 2024-0009830). The requested change falls within the 
action area previously analyzed for effects . Disturbance acreage for the project will remain the 
same. The change to the conservation measures of the proposed action is expected to have only a 
minor effect due to a potential reduction in the distance from which disturbance may occur from 
Southwestern willow flycatcher and yellow-billed cuckoo habitat during the non-breeding 
season. The overall effect from the changes to the conservation measures for the Southwestern 
willow flycatcher and yellow-billed cuckoo will be to continue to minimize potential adverse 
effects from the project and will not substantially change the level of those effects analyzed in 
the previous consultation with respect to these species. All other proposed measures to minimize 
effects to listed species in the project area remain valid as described in the original biological 
opinion. 
PUBLIC INVOLVEMENT 
The public was provided a 30-day scoping period to disclose potential issues and concerns 
associated with the Proposed Action. Information obtained by the agencies during public scoping 
was combined with issues identified by the agencies and this formed the scope of the EA. Public 
scoping ran from April 3 to May 3, 2023. During Scoping a press release was issued by the BLM 
Nevada State Office to Nevada media outlets. An BLM National NEPA Register website was 
launched and is active throughout the NEPA process (https://eplanning.blm.gov /eplanning­
ui/project/202404 1/510). A scoping overview document was also published to the site to provide 
introductory Project information to the public in advance of the public scoping meetings. By the 
close of the scoping process, 16 comment documents had been received. 
[[page 4]]
The EA for the Reno to Las Vegas Fiber Optic Project was issued for public comment on 
December 12, 2023, at which time the 30-day comment period commenced and ended on 
January 11, 2024. A total of 20 agencies, businesses, organizations, and interested parties 
provided comments on the EA via mail, email, or the Reno to Las Vegas Fiber Project National 
NEPA Register website. Appendix A of the project EA, DOI-BLM-NV-C000-2023-0003-EA, 
provides the list of comments and responses to those comments. The EA was revised based on 
substantive comments received during public comment period. 
DECISION 
Based on the analysis in the Reno to Las Vegas Fiber Optic Project EA, DOI-BLM -NV-C000-
2023-0003-EA, it is my decision to implement the Proposed Action as described in the EA with 
the identified Environmental Protection Measures (EPMs) as identified throughout the EA and 
collated in Appendix I of the EA. The Proposed Action meets the purpose and need for the 
proposed project as stated in Section 1.2 of the EA. 
RATIONALE FOR DECISION 
Upon analyzing the impacts ofthe Proposed Action and following issuance of the EA for public 
review, I have determined that implementing the Proposed Action as described in Chapter 2 of 
the EA with incorporated Environmental Protection Measures will not have a significant impact 
to the human environment and that an EIS is not required. Refer to the attached Finding ofNo 
Significance. 
AUTHORITIES 
The Proposed Action is in conformance with the FLPMA of 1976, the Carson City Field Office 
Consolidated Resource Management Plan (CRMP) approved in 2001, the Tonopah Resource 
Management plan approved in 1997, the Las Vegas Resource Management Plan approved in 
1998, the regulations at 43 CFR §2800, and with current BLM policies, plans, and programs . The 
Proposed Action is consistent in relationship to statutes; regulations; and policies of neighboring 
local, County, State, Tribal governments, and other Federal agencies. 
The attached Environmental Protection Measures and FONS! show that all practicable means to 
avoid or minimize environmental harm have been adopted and that unnecessary or undue 
degradation of the public lands will not occur as a result of the proposed Reno to Las Vegas 
Fiber Optic Project. 
[[page 5]]
APPROVAL 
The Reno to Las Vegas Fiber Optic Project DOI-BLM-NV-C000-2023-0003-EA is approved for 
implementation as described above in this Decision Record, with incorporation of identified 
Environmental Protection Measures. This project is approved for implementation upon receipt 
ofa ROW grant and issuance decision, signed by the Authorized Officer, in accordance with 
Title 43 CFR 2805.13. 
This Decision is in conformance with the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (P.L. 91-
190) as amended (72 USC 4321 et. seq., the Carson City Field Office Consolidated Resource 
Management Plan (CRMP) approved in 2001, the Tonopah Resource Management plan 
approved in 1997, the Las Vegas Resource Management Plan approved in 1998, the regulations 
at 43 CFR §2800, and with current BLM policies, plans and programs. 
03/'D lPI 2D2..Y 
District Manager Date 
Carson City District Office 
KimberlyD.Dow 
[[page 6]]
APPEAL PROCEDURES 
If you wish to appeal this decision, it may be appealed to the Interior Board of Land Appeals, 
Office of the Secretary, in accordance with 43 CFR Part 4. If you appeal, your appeal must also 
be filed with the Bureau of Land Management at the following address: 
Kimberly D. Dow, Carson City District Manager 
BLM, Carson City District Office 
5665 Morgan Mill Road 
Carson City, NV 89701 
Your appeal must be filed within thirty (30) days from receipt or issuance ofthis decision. The 
appellant has the burden of showing that the decision appealed from is in error. 
If you wish to file a petition pursuant to regulation 43 CFR 4.2 I for a stay (suspension) of the 
decision during the time that your appeal is being reviewed by the Board, the petition for stay 
must accompany your notice of appeal. 
Copies of the notice of appeal and petition for a stay must also be submitted to: 
Interior Board of Land Appeals 
801 N. Quincy Street, Suite 300 
Arlington, VA 22203 
A copy must also be sent to the appropriate office of the Solicitor at the same time the original 
documents are filed with the above office. 
U.S. Department of the Interior 
Office of the Regional Solicitor 
Pacific Southwest Region 
2800 Cottage Way, Room E-1712 
Sacramento, CA 95825 
If you request a stay, you have the burden of proof to demonstrate that a stay should be granted. 
A petition for a stay is required to show sufficient justification based on the following standards: 
1. The relative harm to the parties if the stay is granted or denied. 
2. The likelihood of the appellants
1 
success on the merits. 
3. The likelihood of immediate and irreparable harm if the stay is not granted. 
4. Whether the public interest favors granting the stay. 
The Office of Hearings and Appeals re1::,'l.llations do not provide for electronic filing of appeals, 
therefore they will not be accepted.

SOURCE: https://blm-eplanninganonconnector-lap.blm.gov/api/Blob_Storage_Download_External (blobUrl /2024041/200549464/20105414/251005414/Vero FONSI_signed_508.pdf) RETRIEVED: 2026-09-24
[Document retrieved through the NEPA Register document download connector; pypdf text extraction]

[[page 1]]
U.S. Department of the Interior 
Bureau of Land Management 
Carson City District Office 
5665 Morgan Mill Road 
Carson City, NV 8970 l 
FINDING OF NO SIGNIFICANT IMPACT 
Reno to Las Vegas Fiber Optic Project 
DOI-BLM -NV-C000-2023 -0002-EA 
Introduction 
Vero Fiber Networks, LLC (Vero) has submitted an application for the construction, operation, 
and repair and maintenance of a new buried fiber optic conduit and cables that extends from 
Reno to Las Vegas. The proposed route would be approximately 450 miles, 327 miles of which 
would be located on Bureau of Land Management [BLM] managed public lands. The proposed 
project would also include in-line amplifier buildings, vaults, and line markers along the 
proposed route. The short-term ROW, N-100968-01/NVNV 106240146, would cover the 
construction of the ROW and the long-term ROW, N- 100968/ NVNV 105856545, would cover 
the operation and maintenance of the fiber optic line. The term of the long-term ROW would be 
30 years while the term of the short-term ROW would be three years. 
The proposed action associated with this ROW includes the construction activities and 
operations associated with the development of an approximately 450-mile-long buried fiber optic 
line spanning from Reno to Las Vegas. The proposed project includes the construction of the 
fiber optic line by plowing, trenching, or boring techniques and the construction of six inline 
amplifier buildings. This proposed buried fiber optic line would cross through Washoe, Lyon, 
Storey, Churchill, Mineral, Nye, Esmeralda, and Clark Counties in Nevada. The proposed project 
would be located within existing rights-of-way that predominantly follow U.S. Highways 50 and 
95; Nevada State Highways 160, 839, and 439; and county-maintained roads from Reno to Las 
Vegas. 
The overall Project purpose is to provide the infrastructure to improve the quality of rural 
broadband in Nevada. This Project would provide the infrastructure for a direct, low-latency, and 
high bandwidth fiber route, providing a unique and diverse fiber network to existing routes. The 
Project would act as a main linkage for distribution lines throughout the fiber optic system . This 
region needs redundant and alternative bandwidth services to improve network quality and 
reliability associated with existing limited bandwidth infrastructure. 
The BLM's purpose is to respond to Vero's request for a long-term ROW grant (N-100968/ 
NVNV105856545) and short-term ROW grant (N-100968-01/NVNV 106240146) for the 
Proposed Action as described in the Plan of Development (POD) and summarized in the attached 
EA. The BLM's need for the action is established by the agency's responsibility under Title V of 
the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (FLPMA) for issuance of ROW Grants 
(43 Code of Federal Regulations [CFR] 2800), to process ROW applications, and to take any 
action necessary to prevent unnecessary or undue degradation of the land. The Proposed Project 
would be divided into phases which are dependent upon timing restrictions for resource 
[[page 2]]
protection and environmental protection measures (EPMs). Issuance of Notices to Proceed would 
be in conformance with as outlined in the EPMs and project plans. 
Finding of No Significant Impact Determination 
Based on the analysis of potential environmental impacts contained in the attached 
environmental assessment (incorporated by reference as Attachment I), considering the CEQ 
regulations, 40 CFR 1501.3 (Determine the Appropriate Level of NEPA Review), and 40 CFR 
1501.6 (Finding of No Significant Impact), I have determined that selecting the proposed action 
in DOI-BLM-NV-C000-2023-0003 -EA document will not have a significant effect on the human 
environment and is not a major federal action. An environmental impact statement is therefore 
not required. This finding is based on potentially affected environment and degree factors of the 
Project, as described below. 
Vero has committed to implementing environmental protection measures (EPMs) to prevent 
environmental degradation during construction, operation, and maintenance activities of the 
Project. Vero has committed lo EPMs for the following resources: Air Quality; Cultural 
Resources; Fire Protection; Noise; Lands and Realty; Livestock and Grazing; Paleontological 
Resources; Public Safety; Recreation; Soils; Threatened and Endangered Species; 
Transportation; Vegetation Including Noxious and Invasive Species; Visual Resources; Wastes, 
Hazardous or Solid; Water Resources Including Wetland and Riparian Areas; and Wildlife 
Resources. There are no mitigation measures to be enforced by the BLM. 
With respect to the Greater sage-grouse, Vero has consulted with the Sagebrush Ecosystem 
Technical Team (SETT) and conducted the CCS analysis as required by the State. The 
preliminary debit calculation was submitted to the SETT for review in May of 2023, with a 
requirement of 21 Term Debits. The BLM will be notified once the proponent has completed 
their full or initial mitigation obligations. With respect to the Mojave desert tortoise, Vero is 
required to submit remuneration fees as part of the Endangered Species Act (ESA) compliance 
process. In total, 350 acres of undisturbed habitat was determined to be in the area of analysis 
that would require renumeration fees for ESA compliance. 
Potentially Affected Environment 
A BLM Interdisciplinary Team (IDT) consisting of National Environmental Policy Act and 
Resource Specialists, contributed to this EA. The IDT used various sources of information to 
prepare the EA, including existing data inventories, and data collected during resource surveys. 
The potential impacts to the resources reviewed in Table 4 of the EA were evaluated by the IDT 
to determine if detailed analysis would be necessary. Through this process, the IDT found that 
air quality, areas of critical environmental concerns, cultural resources, environmental justice, 
soils and prime or unique farmlands, wildlife, floodplains, lands and realty, migratory birds, 
Native American religious concerns, socioeconomics, special stat species, threatened and 
endangered species, transportation, vegetation including noxious and invasive species, visual 
resources, surface and ground water resources, and wetland and riparian zones. warranted 
detailed analyses in this EA. 
Degree of Effects 
• Short- and long-term effects of the selected alternative 
[[page 3]]
o Short-term effects are related to construction activities, which would include 
localized impacts to soils, air quality, wildlife, transportation, vegetation including 
noxious weeds and invasive species, visual resources, and water resources. These 
impacts would dissipate as soon as construction activities cease. With respect to 
impacts to local socioeconomics, local communities would benefit from construction 
contractor crews spending money for goods and services. Impacts to these resources 
would be negligible given that the proposed excavation for the fiber-optic cable 
installation is small in scale and would involve a narrow trenching machine working 
adjacent to existing roadways and existing utility routes along the proposed route. 
Long-term effects are related to the operation and maintenance of the buried fiber 
optic conduit and cables and in-line amplifiers (ILAs). Impacts related to the presence 
of the ILAs would affect visual resource management and would disturb two acres of 
land within 100 to 250 feet of existing roads. Soils in the proposed project area would 
be impacted long-term however, most of the soils within the area of the analysis in 
the EA have previously been disturbed so there is limited native soil. The 
Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan, Appendix B of the Project Plan, provides 
direction on reducing erosion potential within the project area. Greater sage-grouse 
(GRSG) and special status plants would be impacted long-term due to construction 
activities. However, EPMs for the protection of these resources have been put into 
place to protect these resources. These EPMs would include treatments to reduce the 
potential for introduction of noxious weeds, concurrent reclamation to reduce 
establishment of invasive species, utilization of the GRSG Sagebrush Ecosystem 
Technical Team Conservation Credit System to offset impacts to GRSG, and 
Required Design Features from the GRSG Approved Resource Management Plan 
Amendment, etc. The Mojave desert tortoise (DT) would be impacted long-term due 
to the construction of the ILAs within their habitat. Environmental Protection 
Measures taken from the project Biological Opinion would reduce impacts to DTs 
and would include OT monitors and authorized DT biologists ·surveying areas prior to 
construction, moving DTs if one is immediately in harm's way, temporary or 
permanent tortoise proof fencing, conducting Worker Environmental Awareness 
Training for construction crews, and etc. The Proposed Action would result in 
negligible, short-term, and localized impacts to yellow-billed cuckoo and 
southwestern willow flycatcher with the implementation of environmental protection 
measures identified in the amended BO and Appendix I of the EA. 
• Beneficial and adverse effects of the selected alternative 
o Benefits of the Proposed Action would include the money spent in local communities 
by construction contractor crews for goods and services. Potential benefits from 
future fiber line connection projects, and projects benefiting from the fiber line such 
as new industries, educational opportunities, improved health and social services and 
social networking may be realized once the dark fiber line is live. The Proposed 
Action is for a dark fiber project and the timeline for this Project fiber line to be live 
is unknown currently. No adverse effects are anticipated to occur from the Proposed 
Action. 
• Whether and to what extent the selected alternative will affect public health and safety 
o Environmental protection measures (EPMs) are described in Appendix I of the EA 
while the management plans for noxious weeds; fire protection prevention; spill 
[[page 4]]
prevention, control, and countermeasures; public safety; contractor safety; drainage 
crossing protection; dust control; and transportation and traffic control are described 
in the Project Plan appendix of the Plan of Development. Taken together, these 
EPMs and management plans will not affect public health and safety. 
• Whether effects of the selected alternative would violate Federal, State, Tribal or local 
law protecting the environment. 
o The Proposed Action conforms with the provisions of NEPA (U.S.C. 4321-4346) and 
FLPMA (43 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.) and is compliant with the Clean Water Act of 1972, 
as amended; National Historic Preservation Act, as amended; Threatened and 
Endangered Species Act of 1973, as amended; Migratory Bird Treaty Act of 1918, as 
amended; Bald and Golden Eagle Protection Act (16 U.S.C. 668), 43 Code of Federal 
Regulations part 2800. 
4 
[[page 5]]
Signature 
Kimberly D. Dow Date 
Carson City District Manager 
Carson City District 
Attachment s 
I) Reno to Las Vegas Fiber Optic Project Environmental Assessment 
5

SOURCE: https://www.usbr.gov/mp/nepa/includes/nepa_data.php?location=lbao RETRIEVED: 2026-09-24
[Reclamation Region 10 NEPA database record, Project_ID 54419, fields TITLE, SUMMARY, NOTES, STATUS_DATE]
Vero Fiber Networks Reno to Las Vegas Fiber Optic Project
Vero Fiber Networks is constructing a 450-mile-long buried fiber optic line primarily within road rights-of-way between Reno and Las Vegas, Nevada. The project will provide the infrastructure to improve the quality and reliability of rural broadband service.

The Bureau of Land Management Reno to Las Vegas Fiber Optic Project, Vero Fiber Networks Environmental Assessment (EA, DOI-BLM-NV-C000-2023-0003-EA, December 2023) describes the environmental effects of authorizing Vero to construct, operate, and maintain the project. In March 2024, the BLM prepared an associated Finding of No Significant Impact (FONSI) and Decision Record for the project. The Bureau of Reclamation (Reclamation) is a cooperating agency for the BLM EA under the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969, as amended (NEPA). Pursuant to 40 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 1500.4(p) and 43 CFR 46.120, Reclamation is adopting the BLM EA as its NEPA compliance document. Link to the BLM EA: https://eplanning.blm.gov/eplanning-ui/project/2024041/570
FONSI posted for EA that was previously posted by BLM (link in summary above) for public comment from 12/11/2023 to 1/10/2024.
30-APR-2024
