SOURCE: https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title16-section668&num=0&edition=prelim RETRIEVED: 2026-09-24
16 USC 668: Bald and golden eagles Text contains those laws in effect on September 23, 2026 From Title 16-CONSERVATIONCHAPTER 5A-PROTECTION AND CONSERVATION OF WILDLIFESUBCHAPTER II-PROTECTION OF BALD AND GOLDEN EAGLES 
§668. Bald and golden eagles
(a) Prohibited acts; criminal penalties
Whoever, within the United States or any place subject to the jurisdiction thereof, without being permitted to do so as provided in this subchapter, shall knowingly, or with wanton disregard for the consequences of his act take, possess, sell, purchase, barter, offer to sell, purchase or barter, transport, export or import, at any time or in any manner any bald eagle commonly known as the American eagle or any golden eagle, alive or dead, or any part, nest, or egg thereof of the foregoing eagles, or whoever violates any permit or regulation issued pursuant to this subchapter, shall be fined not more than $5,000 or imprisoned not more than one year or both: Provided, That in the case of a second or subsequent conviction for a violation of this section committed after October 23, 1972, such person shall be fined not more than $10,000 or imprisoned not more than two years, or both: Provided further, That the commission of each taking or other act prohibited by this section with respect to a bald or golden eagle shall constitute a separate violation of this section: Provided further, That one-half of any such fine, but not to exceed $2,500, shall be paid to the person or persons giving information which leads to conviction: Provided further, That nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit possession or transportation of any bald eagle, alive or dead, or any part, nest, or egg thereof, lawfully taken prior to June 8, 1940, and that nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit possession or transportation of any golden eagle, alive or dead, or any part, nest, or egg thereof, lawfully taken prior to the addition to this subchapter of the provisions relating to preservation of the golden eagle.
(b) Civil penalties
Whoever, within the United States or any place subject to the jurisdiction thereof, without being permitted to do so as provided in this subchapter, shall take, possess, sell, purchase, barter, offer to sell, purchase or barter, transport, export or import, at any time or in any manner, any bald eagle, commonly known as the American eagle, or any golden eagle, alive or dead, or any part, nest, or egg thereof of the foregoing eagles, or whoever violates any permit or regulation issued pursuant to this subchapter, may be assessed a civil penalty by the Secretary of not more than $5,000 for each such violation. Each violation shall be a separate offense. No penalty shall be assessed unless such person is given notice and opportunity for a hearing with respect to such violation. In determining the amount of the penalty, the gravity of the violation, and the demonstrated good faith of the person charged shall be considered by the Secretary. For good cause shown, the Secretary may remit or mitigate any such penalty. Upon any failure to pay the penalty assessed under this section, the Secretary may request the Attorney General to institute a civil action in a district court of the United States for any district in which such person is found or resides or transacts business to collect the penalty and such court shall have jurisdiction to hear and decide any such action. In hearing any such action, the court must sustain the Secretary's action if supported by substantial evidence.

ALSO RETRIEVED 2026-09-24: https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title16-section668a&num=0&edition=prelim
16 USC 668a: Taking and using of the bald and golden eagle for scientific, exhibition, and religious purposes Text contains those laws in effect on September 23, 2026 From Title 16-CONSERVATIONCHAPTER 5A-PROTECTION AND CONSERVATION OF WILDLIFESUBCHAPTER II-PROTECTION OF BALD AND GOLDEN EAGLES 
§668a. Taking and using of the bald and golden eagle for scientific, exhibition, and religious purposes
Whenever, after investigation, the Secretary of the Interior shall determine that it is compatible with the preservation of the bald eagle or the golden eagle to permit the taking, possession, and transportation of specimens thereof for the scientific or exhibition purposes of public museums, scientific societies, and zoological parks, or for the religious purposes of Indian tribes, or that it is necessary to permit the taking of such eagles for the protection of wildlife or of agricultural or other interests in any particular locality, he may authorize the taking of such eagles pursuant to regulations which he is hereby authorized to prescribe: Provided, That on request of the Governor of any State, the Secretary of the Interior shall authorize the taking of golden eagles for the purpose of seasonally protecting domesticated flocks and herds in such State, in accordance with regulations established under the provisions of this section, in such part or parts of such State and for such periods as the Secretary determines to be necessary to protect such interests: Provided further, That bald eagles may not be taken for any purpose unless, prior to such taking, a permit to do so is procured from the Secretary of the Interior: Provided further, That the Secretary of the Interior, pursuant to such regulations as he may prescribe, may permit the taking, possession, and transportation of golden eagles for the purposes of falconry, except that only golden eagles which would be taken because of depredations on livestock or wildlife may be taken for purposes of falconry: Provided further, That the Secretary of the Interior, pursuant to such regulations as he may prescribe, may permit the taking of golden eagle nests which interfere with resource development or recovery operations.

ALSO RETRIEVED 2026-09-24: https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-50/chapter-I/subchapter-B/part-22/subpart-E (via eCFR API https://www.ecfr.gov/api/versioner/v1/full/2026-09-22/title-50.xml?part=22 ; eCFR up to date as of 2026-09-22). Extract: 50 CFR 22.210(a)-(b), (c) (one certification paragraph), (d), (f); 22.260(a), (c), (d)(5)-(7).
§ 22.210 General permits. (a) Purpose. General permits authorize the take of bald eagles or golden eagles for other interests that meet the eligibility requirements for general permits set forth in § 22.250, § 22.260, § 22.280, or § 22.300.
(b) Eligibility. To qualify for a general permit, you must be conducting an activity identified in § 22.250, § 22.260, § 22.280, or § 22.300 and meet any additional eligibility requirements identified in the relevant section.
(d) Issuance criteria. Upon an applicant registering by submitting an application under paragraph (c) of this section, the Service will automatically issue a general permit to authorize the take requested in the application. In registering, you must certify that you meet the general criteria of § 13.21 of this subchapter and the following issuance criteria:
(f) Tenure. The tenure of each permit will be designated on the face of the permit. General permits have a maximum tenure of 5 years. Permit tenure may be less, as restricted by the applicable provisions in § 22.250, § 22.260, § 22.280, or § 22.300.
[89 FR 9958, Feb. 12, 2024, as amended at 89 FR 83631, Oct. 17, 2024] § 22.260 Permits for incidental take of eagles by power lines. (a) Purpose. The regulations in this section authorize the incidental killing or injury of bald eagles and golden eagles associated with power line activities. Apply using Form 3-200-71.
(c) Eligibility for a general permit for incidental take. To qualify for a general permit, you must meet the requirements of § 22.210.
(d) General permit conditions for power lines. Project permittees must:
(5) Train personnel to scan for eagle remains when onsite and implement internal reporting and recordkeeping procedures for discovered eagles.
(6) Ensure that all new construction and rebuild or replacement of poles in areas of high risk for eagles is avian-safe unless this requirement would unduly impact human health and safety, require overly burdensome engineering, or have significant adverse effects on biological, cultural, or historical resources.
(7) For new construction and rebuild, reconstruction, or replacement projects, incorporate information on eagles into siting and design considerations. Minimize eagle risk by siting away from eagle-use areas (e.g., nests and winter roosts), accounting for the risk to and population status of the species, unless this requirement would unduly impact human health and safety; require overly burdensome engineering; or have significant adverse effects on biological, cultural, or historical resources.
[50 CFR 22.210(c), certification paragraph (iv), as extracted:]
(iv) Certification that the activity involving the take of eagles authorized by the general permit complies with all other applicable Federal, State, Tribal, and local laws. This includes certifying that the activity for which take is to be authorized by the general permit either does not affect a property that is listed, or is eligible for listing, in the National Register of Historic Places as maintained by the Secretary of the Interior; or that the applicant has obtained, and is in compliance with, a written agreement with the relevant State Historic Preservation Officer or Tribal Historic Preservation Officer that outlines all measures the applicant will undertake to mitigate or prevent adverse effects to the historic property.
